Title: High-quality single-shot capture of facial geometry

High-Quality Single-Shot Capture of Facial Geometry
Thabo Beeler1,2
Bernd Bickel1,2
Paul Beardsley2
Bob Sumner2
Markus Gross1,2
1ETH Zurich
2Disney Research Zurich
Figure 1: Left: Face model captured using a seven camera studio setup; Center: capture systems; Right: Face model captured using
consumer binocular-stereo camera. Facial geometry in all ﬁgures is best viewed in the electronic version.
Abstract
This paper describes a passive stereo system for capturing the 3D
geometry of a face in a single-shot under standard light sources.
The system is low-cost and easy to deploy.
Results are sub-
millimeter accurate and commensurate with those from state-of-
the-art systems based on active lighting, and the models meet the
quality requirements of a demanding domain like the movie indus-
try. Recovered models are shown for captures from both high-end
cameras in a studio setting and from a consumer binocular-stereo
camera, demonstrating scalability across a spectrum of camera de-
ployments, and showing the potential for 3D face modeling to move
beyond the professional arena and into the emerging consumer mar-
ket in stereoscopic photography.
Our primary technical contribution is a modiﬁcation of standard
stereo reﬁnement methods to capture pore-scale geometry, using a
qualitative approach that produces visually realistic results. The
second technical contribution is a calibration method suited to
face capture systems. The systemic contribution includes multi-
ple demonstrations of system robustness and quality. These include
capture in a studio setup, capture off a consumer binocular-stereo
camera, scanning of faces of varying gender and ethnicity and age,
capture of highly-transient facial expression, and scanning a physi-
cal mask to provide ground-truth validation.
CR Categories:
I.3.2 [Computer Graphics]:
Graphics
Systems—Stand-alone systems; I.3.7 [Computer Graphics]: Three-
Dimensional Graphics and Realism—Color, shading, shadowing,
and texture I.4.1 [Image Processing and Computer Vision]: Digiti-
zation and Image Capture
1
Introduction
1.1
Motivation
Capturing a high-quality model of a human face is of interest in
multiple domains - for the movie and games industries, in medicine,
to provide more natural user-interfaces, and for archival purposes.
A key application is the synthesis of a desired sequence of speech
and facial expression under arbitrary lighting. This problem has
motivated striking results in rendering [Donner and Jensen 2006;
Donner et al. 2008], in performance-driven facial animation [Hyne-
man et al. 2005; Alexander et al. 2009], and in physics-based ani-
mation [Sifakis et al. 2005]. However, reproducing realistic human
faces is still a challenge for computer graphics because humans are
sensitive to facial appearance and quickly sense any anomalies in
3D geometry or dynamics.
This paper is concerned with the capture of 3D geometry of the
face. The current method of choice for this task is an active system
based on laser, structured light or gradient-based illumination. Ac-
tive light brings robustness because it effectively augments an ob-
ject surface with known information. On the other hand, it requires
special-purpose hardware and often employs time-multiplexing.
Polarization-based methods further constrain deployment to a sin-
gle camera at a ﬁxed viewpoint. Contrast this with passive stereo
vision, which has the potential to be an extremely versatile modal-
ity for constructing 3D models - it captures in a single shot, readily
adapts to different arrangements and numbers of cameras with no
constraint on camera position, seamlessly integrates 3D data cap-
tured over multiple distances and at different scales in a scene, cap-
tures texture that is intrinsically registered with the recovered 3D
data, and uses commodity hardware. However, in the past, the re-
liability and accuracy of passive stereo have fallen short of what is
available from active systems, and it has not been used for capturing
high-quality face models.
This paper presents a passive stereo vision system that computes
the 3D geometry of the face with reliability and accuracy on a par
with a laser scanner or a structured light system. We introduce an
image-based embossing technique to capture mesoscopic facial ge-
ometry1, so that the quality of synthesized faces from our system
1We use the term mesoscopic for geometry at the scale of pores and ﬁne


equals that achieved with gradient-based illumination. In practical
terms, we equal the performance of active systems while attaining
the advantages of passive stereo already listed, particularly capture
in a single shot under standard light sources, low-cost, and ease-of-
deployment. To demonstrate the robustness of the system, we show
results for faces of varying gender, ethnicity and age. To demon-
strate versatility, we show face models captured off a studio setup
and off a consumer binocular-stereo camera, with the latter result
suggesting that 3D face scanning is poised to move beyond the pro-
fessional arena and become a practical application on the desktop.
1.2
Related Work
The best current techniques for capturing geometry of a human face
are active. The domain grew from original work on stereo capture
of a face augmented with skin markings [Parke 1974]. A survey
of the area is given in [Pighin and Lewis 2005]. More recent work
begins with a hybrid system that combines a recovered depth map
and recovered surface normals to generate a model [Nehab et al.
2005]. This technique has been utilized for faces in [Weyrich et al.
2006], and in [Ma et al. 2007] which presented a system for acquir-
ing high-quality surface normals using polarized gradient-based il-
lumination to generate high-resolution 3D reconstructions. Further
work includes a hybrid system of structured light and stereo [Weise
et al. 2007], and the application of the technique to facial expression
transfer in [Weise et al. 2009]. Recent work on single shot photo-
metric stereo is described in [Hernandez et al. 2008]. A hybrid
system of active light and augmented skin markings is the basis for
the current state-of-the-art example of creating a photoreal human
face in [Alexander et al. 2009].
Turning to non-active techniques, Section 2 of this paper describes
stereo matching and generation of a 3D mesh. We build on es-
tablished techniques described in the survey paper [Seitz et al.
2006], and also take inspiration from [Furukawa and Ponce 2007].
Commercial solutions [DI3D 2009] as well as concurrent work
by [Bradley et al. 2010] are also applying MVS to the domain of
face scanning. The main difference to our system lies in the re-
ﬁnement formulation described in Section 3. Our starting point is
the established approach of reﬁning recovered 3D data based on a
data-driven photo-consistency term and a surface-smoothing term,
which has been a subject of research ranging from [Scharstein and
Szeliski 1996] to
[Woodford et al. 2008]. Our work differs in
the use of a second-order anisotropic formulation of the smooth-
ing term, and we argue that it is particularly suited to faces.
We present an extension to traditional stereo reﬁnement in our
method for modeling mesoscopic geometry of the face in Section 3.
The data-driven and smoothing terms are augmented with a third
term that uses image texture to drive the qualitative recovery of
mesoscopic geometry, and we thereby capture ﬁne variations of
the geometry that are irrecoverable using stereo disparity alone.
Although unrelated to our method, shape recipes are instructive
on the relationship between image data and shape data [Torralba
and Freeman 2003]. Other works concerned with ﬁne-scale de-
tail are the mesh optimization in [Hiep et al. 2009], the modeling
in [Golovinskiy et al. 2006], and extraction of mesostructure from
specularity in [Chen et al. 2006]. Our method is similar in spirit
to [Glencross et al. 2008] which describes qualitative recovery of
3D information for bas-relief surfaces but the technical approaches
are different, and Glencross’s system being self-contained while we
are proposing an extension within the existing framework of stereo
reﬁnement.
Turning to the area of camera calibration, there is a body of theory
available in a standard text such as [Hartley and Zisserman 2000].
wrinkles, and macroscopic for overall 3D shape of the face.
Our calibration contribution is practical, not theoretical, and de-
scribed in Section 2.1.
1.3
Contributions
This paper makes a systemic contribution and two technical contri-
butions. The systemic contribution is to demonstrate a state-of-the-
art passive stereo vision system for face scanning, and to argue that
past weaknesses have been overcome to yield a technology that is
single-shot, low-cost, easy to deploy, and has impact in two areas.
Firstly in the area of professional capture of high-quality face mod-
els, we argue that passive stereo is on an equal footing with active
systems. Secondly in the emerging area of consumer stereo pho-
tography, we show that face scanning can be accomplished using
a consumer binocular-stereo camera, indicating that the technology
is ready to expand beyond the professional domain. Moving to our
technical contributions, the primary contribution is the modeling of
mesoscopic geometry in Section 3.3, and the second contribution is
the calibration method in Section 2.1. We also describe extensions
to generic stereo reﬁnement methods in Sections 3.1 and 3.2 that
tailor the processing to faces.
2
Face Scanning
This section describes the end-to-end system as shown in Fig-
ure 2. Camera calibration is a pre-processing stage and is described
in Section 2.1. The run-time system begins with pairwise stereo
matching, and uses a pyramidal approach in which results at lower-
resolutions guide the matching at higher-resolutions as described in
Section 2.2. At each layer of the pyramid, matches are computed at
pixel level to give dense matches across the face, and the matches
are used to generate a 3D mesh as described in Section 2.3. The
mesh is reﬁned using a modiﬁcation of the traditional approach,
in which photo-consistency and smoothing terms are augmented
with a novel term that captures ﬁne detail at the pore-level. This
is described in Section 3. Low-level details are omitted in places
for space reasons, but a full description of the system is available
in [Beeler et al. 2010]. An excellent overview and categorization of
MVS is found in [Seitz et al. 2006];
2.1
Calibration
The theoretical foundation of camera calibration is well established,
and our focus has been on the practical matter of achieving a
straightforward and reliable calibration for a face-capture system.
The method requires a small number of views, typically one to three
views, of a sphere augmented with ﬁducials as shown in Figure 3.
Each ﬁducial is a double circle. The center points of the circles
provide the correspondences between cameras, as well as provid-
ing a known metric distance DF that can be used to set scale. The
ﬁducials are not used to provide known 3D coordinates - hence the
sphere need not be perfect, and the ﬁducials can be placed by hand
with arbitrary distribution. Fiducials were printed on sticky paper,
and the slight distortion in ﬁxing a ﬂat sticker to a spherical surface
was not found to be a problem.
The approach has the following advantages.
Firstly it is suited
to face capture because a calibration sphere that is approximately
head-sized and placed at the intended position of the subject is
therefore well-placed for the cameras. The sphere need not lie com-
pletely within the camera images so there is no ﬁne-tune position-
ing. Unlike a calibration plane, a sphere has no preferred direc-
tion in space, making it appropriate for a setup in which circum-
positioned cameras are directed inward towards an object of inter-
est. Unlike an LED-based calibration, the method requires only a
small number of views and provides sub-pixel accurate features.


Meshing
Section 2.3
Capture
Pairwise Stereo-Reconstruction
Surface 
Refinement
Mesoscopic 
Augmentation
Section 3.2
Section 3.3
Section 2.2
A
A
B
D
C
B
C
B
C
D
A
B
D
C
Uniqueness Constraint
Disparity Refinement
Uniqueness Constraint
Re-Match
Uniqueness Constraint
Ordering Constraint
Smoothness Constraint
Match
n
2
1
Figure 2: The proposed system - The subject is captured with multiple cameras. This ﬁgure shows a four-camera setup, but the system can
incorporate an arbitrary number of cameras.
Finally, the calibration sphere occupies the same workspace as the
subject’s head in the run-time system. Thus, we ensure that cal-
ibration data is collected - and the calibration is therefore well-
estimated - in exactly the same workspace as will be used at run-
time.
Figure 3: Fiducials are placed randomly on the calibration sphere.
A ﬁducial consists of two checkerboard circles with red dots at their
centers. The ﬁducial deﬁnes a known distance DF .
Calibration is fully automatic. The algorithm is
• Segment out the sphere in each image using cues of back-
ground subtraction and known sphere color.
• Fit an ellipse to the silhouette of the segmented sphere. Ignore
the area outside the ellipse in the remainder.
• Detect the circles via spots of known color at their centers.
Compute the center positions to sub-pixel accuracy using
function ﬁndCornerSubPix in [Intel 2001].
• Set up an approximately Euclidean coordinate frame with the
origin at the center of the calibration sphere by using (a) a
rough estimate of camera focal length plus (b) the known met-
ric dimension of the sphere.
• Compute the 3D coordinates of the detected circle centers in
this coordinate frame, Each ﬁducial thereby generates one 3D
triangular facet with vertices at the sphere center and the ﬁdu-
cial’s two circle centers.
• Match the 3D triangular facets between pairs of cameras us-
ing RANSAC [Hartley and Zisserman 2000]. Note that a sin-
gle putative match is sufﬁcient to compute a rotation between
two cameras in the approximately-euclidean frame, while the
translation has been factored out by the choice of sphere cen-
ter as the origin. Thus the sample size for the RANSAC sam-
pling is one.
• Use the computed correspondences between pairs of cameras
to construct correspondences across all cameras.
• Discard the approximately-euclidean frame, and use the com-
puted correspondences as input to the calibration system
at [Svoboda ] to determine camera intrinsics and extrinsics
up to unknown scale.
• Set the scale of the computed coordinate frame using the
known distance DF .
• Deﬁne a 3D ’capture-zone’ as the intersection of the camera
viewing frustums, to delimit the active region within which
3D processing will be done at run-time.
2.2
Pairwise Stereo-Reconstruction
In this section we describe the individual steps of our stereo recon-
struction. First, the face is segmented out of the images using cues
of background subtraction and skin color. Matching is done pair-
wise between neighboring cameras2, and at pixel level to establish
dense matches across the face. For a given camera-pair, the ﬁrst
step is to rectify the images to obtain row-aligned epipolar geom-
etry. An image pyramid is generated for each rectiﬁed image by
factor-of-two subsampling using Gaussian convolution. The image
resolution at the lowest-resolution layer of the pyramid is chosen to
be around 150 × 150 pixels, but this is approximate and the criteria
is simply that the major facial features are still visible.
Each layer of the pyramid is then processed as follows: First,
matches are computed for all pixels as described in Section 2.2.1.
Next, we check smoothness, uniqueness and ordering constraints
for each pixel (see Section 2.2.2).
Pixels that do not fulﬁll
these constraints are re-matched using a limited search area (Sec-
tion 2.2.1). The limited search area ensures that smoothness and
ordering constraints hold on the re-matched pixels. The uniqueness
constraint however needs to be enforced once more. The dispar-
ity maps are then reﬁned. An in-depth description is deferred to
Section 3.1, since it is an instantiation of the reﬁnement formula-
tion introduced in Section 3. Finally, the uniqueness constraint is
enforced again.
Matching starts at the lowest-resolution layer of the pyramid. The
resulting disparity map provides input to the the next higher layer,
where it is used to constrain the search area for matching, and so on
2Pairing of cameras in a multi-camera system is done manually, although
it would be straightforward to automate if needed.


up to the highest-resolution layer of the pyramid. As demonstrated
in Figure 4, this leads to a hierarchical reﬁnement of the reconstruc-
tion over the layers of the pyramid.
Figure 4: Reconstructions of a stereo-pair at 4 different layers of
the pyramid starting from the coarsest layer ℓ4 (160px × 160px).
The dimensions double at each layer up to the highest resolution
layer ℓ1 (1280px × 1280px).
2.2.1
Pixel Matching
Following the taxonomy of [Scharstein and Szeliski 2002], the sys-
tem employs a winner-take-all block-matching algorithm using nor-
malized cross-correlation (NCC) as matching cost over a square
window (3x3). Matching is performed along the epipolar line only.
Pixel p in image I is matched against all pixels in image J within
a given search area and the best match is retained. The disparity
at p is computed to sub-pixel accuracy by computing NCC values
for p against the matching pixel q and its two neighbors in image
J , ﬁtting a polynomial of degree two, and ﬁnding the position in
image J where it is at maximum.
Matching is performed twice per layer. The initial matching com-
putes putative matches for all pixels using the disparity estimates of
the preceding layer (or the ’capture-zone’ if no preceding guesses
are present) to constrain the search area. Next, we check for each
pixel smoothness, uniqueness and ordering constraints (see Sec-
tion 2.2.2). Pixels that do not fulﬁll these constraints are re-matched
using the disparity estimates of the neighboring pixels that fulﬁlled
the constraints to limit the search area.
2.2.2
Constraints
The system can make use of constraints that hold for human faces in
the given setting. Pixels in image I are matched against image J ,
and vice-versa from image J to image I. Acceptance of a match
at pixel p in image I is subject to three constraints -
• Smoothness Constraint - computed disparity at p is consis-
tent with neighbors in a surrounding window. In our imple-
mentation this is achieved by enforcing that more than half of
all neighbors in a 3×3 neighborhood differ by a disparity less
than one pixel.
• Uniqueness Constraint - the matching needs to be bijective:
if p in image I matches to q in image J then q must also
match to p. To take different foreshortening into account we
tolerate a disparity mismatch of up to one pixel in our imple-
mentation.
• Ordering Constraint - computed disparity at p does not ex-
ceed the disparity of its right-neighbor pixel by more than one
pixel.
2.3
Meshing
This section uses established techniques. Each camera-pair in Sec-
tion 2.2 produces one disparity map, which is used to compute a
corresponding array of 3D points and a corresponding array of sur-
face normals. Since we estimate a dense disparity map, the normals
are computed using ﬁnite differences on the points. 3D points and
surface normals are collected across all camera pairs3. Outliers are
removed using a simpliﬁed approach of [Merrell et al. 2007]. If
two 3D points project onto the same pixel in a given camera view,
both with normals facing towards that camera, and without an inter-
mediate point with normal facing away from the camera, then the
associated topology is incorrect, and the 3D point with the higher
foreshortening angle is rejected. The resulting set of 3D points and
normals is input to a Poisson surface reconstruction [Kazhdan et al.
2006]. The output is a triangular mesh, each vertex consisting of
a 3D point plus surface normal. This mesh is then reﬁned as de-
scribed in Section 3.2.
3
Reﬁnement
This section describes the reﬁnement method that was utilized in
Section 2. The reﬁnement consists of a linear combination of two
terms: a photometric consistency term dp that favors solutions with
high NCC and a surface consistency term ds that favors smooth so-
lutions. These terms are balanced both by a user-speciﬁed smooth-
ness parameter ws and a data-driven parameter wp, which ensures
that the photometric term has greatest weight in regions with good
feature localization. The reﬁnement is performed both on the dis-
parity map and later on the surface and we will discuss the individ-
ual realizations in Sections 3.1 and 3.2, resp. Both reﬁnements are
implemented as iterative processes. In practice they were found to
preserve the volume and to converge quickly to the desired solu-
tion. Figure 5 shows the convergence for the disparity reﬁnement.
Since the convergence is close to exponential at the beginning, we
terminate the reﬁnement before convergence is reached to strike a
balance between quality and computational effort. This is espe-
cially valuable for lower-resolution layers of the disparity pyramid,
since the next higher layer is going to reﬁne the disparities anyway
and we therefore need only to eliminate the gross errors.
3.1
Disparity Map Reﬁnement
Sub-pixel disparity values are updated in every iteration as a linear
combination of dp and ds, where dp is an adjustment in the direc-
tion of improved photometric-consistency, and ds is an adjustment
in the direction of improved surface-consistency. Individual steps
are -
Compute dp - Given current pixel p in image I and its match q in
image J , compute the NCC of p with q −1, q, q + 1 where the
offsets indicate the left- and right-neighbors of q. We use NCC =
(1 −NCC)/2, which resembles an error function ranging from 0
(no error) to 1 (complete dissimilarity). The respective NCCs are
labeled ξ−1, ξ0, ξ+1 and dp is calculated as
dp =
8
>
<
>
:
p −q −0.5
ξ−1
< ξ0, ξ+1
p −q + 0.5
(ξ−1−ξ+1)
ξ−1+ξ+1−2ξ0
ξ0
< ξ−1, ξ+1
p −q + 0.5
ξ+1
< ξ−1, ξ0
Compute ds - The formulation of surface-consistency has been de-
signed for human faces, where disparity varies smoothly with just a
few (extreme) depth discontinuities. These discontinuities suggest
the use of anisotropic kernels [Robert and Deriche 1996], which
adapt to the local gradient to avoid smoothening across boundaries.
For human faces however, regions of high gradient are mostly due
to different foreshortening of the camera pairs and smoothening
should not be attenuated within these regions. Following [Wood-
ford et al. 2008] we employ second-order properties, but use them
3There is no special processing if multiple camera-pairs cover the same
part of the face giving rise to overlapping 3D data.


within an anisotropic formulation over a two dimensional domain.
The equation is discretized as
ds = wx(dx−1,y + dx+1,y) + wy(dx,y−1 + dx,y−1)
2(wx + wy)
(1)
where wx
=
exp(−(|dx−1,y −dx,y| −|dx+1,y −dx,y|)2).
These weights render the harmonic equation anisotropic, reducing
smoothing across depth discontinuities.
Compute d′ - The equation is d′ = (wpdp + wsds) / (wp + ws),
where ws is a user-speciﬁed smoothness parameter and wp is
wp =
8
>
<
>
:
ξ0 −ξ−1
ξ−1
< ξ0, ξ+1
0.5(ξ−1 + ξ+1 −2ξ0)
ξ0
< ξ−1, ξ+1
ξ0 −ξ+1
ξ+1
< ξ−1, ξ0
Thus the photometric term has greatest weight in textured areas of
the image where the image data is most informative about feature
localization.
The reﬁnement is terminated after a predeﬁned number of iterations
(40 for the lower-resolution layers and 180 for highest layer). See
Figure 5 for justiﬁcation.
Figure 5: Convergence of the reﬁnement over the ﬁrst 1000 itera-
tions at layer ℓ1 using ws = 0.005. The images in the back show
samples of the surface at iterations 0,1,5,10,100 and 1000, resp.
The initial convergence is close to exponential (note the log scale
for the iteration axis) and as can be seen from the samples the qual-
ity does not change noticeably between iterations 100 and 1000. We
thus stop the reﬁnement at iteration 180.
3.2
Surface Reﬁnement
The surface reﬁnement differs from the disparity map reﬁnement in
that we need to reﬁne in continuous 3-space. To keep computation
tractable we restrict the reﬁnement to along the normal direction
n at X and deﬁne a reﬁnement resolution δ (usually 0.1 mm). The
normals are not changed during the reﬁnement. This again results in
a discrete one-dimensional reﬁnement and we proceed analogously
to Section 3.1 by iterating over all points and computing updates for
X as a linear combination of Xp and Xs, where Xp is an adjust-
ment in the direction of improved photometric-consistency, and Xs
is an adjustment in the direction of improved surface-consistency.
Individual steps are -
Compute Xp - Generate the points X−δ = X −δn and X+δ =
X + δn. Deﬁne as reference view the visible camera with the least
foreshortened view of X. Measure a photo-consistency error for
a point by taking the NCC between a 3x3 patch centered at the
projection in the reference image and the corresponding patches in
all other images where the patch is visible. Compute δp analogously
to dp given error values ξ−δ, ξ0 and ξ+δ for X−δ, X0 and X+δ,
resp.
Compute Xs - The surface-consistency estimate Xs is computed
using mean-curvature ﬂow [Meyer et al. 2003].
Compute X′ - Compute X′ = (wpXp+wsXs)/(wp+ws) where
wp and ws are the same as in Section 3.1.
3.3
Mesoscopic Augmentation
The reﬁnement in Section 3.2 results in surface geometry that is
smooth across skin pores and ﬁne wrinkles, because the disparity
change across such a feature is too small to detect4. The result is
ﬂatness and lack of realism in synthesized views of the face. On the
other hand, visual inspection shows the obvious presence of pores
and ﬁne wrinkles in the images. This is due to the fact that light re-
ﬂected by a diffuse surface is related to the integral of the incoming
light. In small concavities, such as pores, part of the incoming light
is blocked and the point thus appears darker. This fact has been
exploited by various authors (e.g. [Glencross et al. 2008]) to infer
local geometry variation. In this section we propose a method to
embed this observation into our surface reﬁnement framework. It
is qualitative, and the geometry that is recovered is not metrically
correct. However, augmenting the macroscopic geometry with ﬁne-
scale features does produce a signiﬁcant improvement in the per-
ceived quality of reconstructed face geometry.
Figure 6: This ﬁgure demonstrates the effect of the mesoscopic-
consistency term. The captured image (a) is ﬁltered to extract the
mesoscopic detail (b). In (c), the Poisson-reconstructed surface is
shown. The reﬁnement described in Section 3.2 already enhances
the coarse geometry (d), but only the mesoscopic formulation is
capable of reproducing the ﬁne-scale details (e).
For the mesoscopic augmentation we are only interested in features
that are too small to be recovered by the stereo algorithm. We there-
fore ﬁrst compute high-pass ﬁltered values µ for all points X using
the projection of a Gaussian N
µ(X) =
P
c∈V αc (Ic(X) −[NΣc ⊗Ic] (X))
P
c∈V αc
,
(2)
where V denotes the set of visible cameras, Σc the covariance ma-
trix of the projection of the Gaussian N into camera c, and the
weighting term αc is the cosine of the foreshortening angle ob-
served at camera c. The variance of the Gaussian N is chosen such
that high spatial frequencies are attenuated. It can either be de-
ﬁned directly on the surface using the known maximum size of the
features or in dependence of the matching window m as described
in [Beeler et al. 2010].
The next steps are based on the assumption that variation in meso-
scopic intensity is linked to variation of the geometry. For human
skin we found that this is mostly the case. Spatially bigger skin
features tend to be smooth and are thus ﬁltered out as shown in Fig-
ure 7. The idea is thus to adapt the local high-frequency geometry
of the mesh to the mesoscopic ﬁeld µ (X). The geometry should
locally form a concavity whenever µ (X) decreases and a convexity
4This is a function of image resolution, not a limitation of the algorithm.


Figure 7: This ﬁgure shows part of a forehead on the left and a
zoomed-in patch on the right. Note that the mesoscopic augmenta-
tion adds high-frequency details such as pores, while coarser fea-
tures, such as the spot showed on the right, usually do not inﬂuence
the geometry, since they usually do not contain very high spatial
frequencies.
when it increases. The new position estimate Xµ = X + δµn is
thus computed using the correctional factor
δµ = η
P
i∈R wi (µ(X) −µ(Xi))
“
1 −|<X−Xi,n>|
∥X−Xi∥
”
P
i∈R wi
,
(3)
where the sum is taken over the one-ring neighborhood R of X.
The weights wi are computed as wi = exp(−∥X −Xi∥) and η is
a user-speciﬁed parameter (the embossing strength). This equation
has the property that the correctional factor δµ is attenuated when
there is little or no high-frequency content in the image and it is
even further attenuated whenever the geometric gradient is large.
This reduces the impact of the mesoscopic term on high-frequency
features that can be reconstructed by the MVS, such as hair. On
the other hand, the correction factor reaches its maximum when
the mesoscopic gradient is large and the geometric gradient small -
augmenting ﬂat surfaces with high-frequency detail.
The update of the 3D point now uses all three adjusted points Xp,
Xs and Xµ to compute X′ = (wpXp + wsXs + wµXµ)/(wp +
ws + wµ). The weights wp and ws are the same as in Section 3.2
and wµ is deﬁned as
wµ = ρ
3ξ0
δ(ξ−δ + ξ0 + ξ+δ),
(4)
with ρ being a user speciﬁed term that controls the inﬂuence of the
mesoscopic term. Figure 6 shows an example of how the meso-
scopic term enriches the results. To emphasize the simplicity of
the reﬁnement we provide pseudocode in Algorithm 1. The algo-
rithms for the reﬁnements described in Sections 3.1 and 3.2 are
very similar and of less complexity, since the mesoscopic term is
not present. The function computes the position update X′ for X
using the normal n. The parameters and their typical values are:
resolution δ = 0.05 in mm, surface smoothness ws = 0.03, meso-
scopic weight ρ = 0.07 and embossing strength η = 0.2.
4
Results
4.1
Capture Process
Results were obtained using two capture systems - a studio setup
and a consumer binocular-stereo camera (see Figure 1). The stu-
dio setup consists of seven cameras arranged around the subject.
Neighboring camera pairs subtend an angle of about 20◦at the head
and the outermost cameras subtend an angle of about 110◦. There
are two Canon 500D cameras on each side, and three Canon 5D
cameras that are arranged in a triangle and dedicated to the frontal
view of the face. The cameras were synchronizable to 0.1 seconds,
which is sufﬁcient for static subjects, but not for capture of transient
Algorithm 1 −X′ = reﬁnePointMesoscopic(X, n, δ, ws, ρ, η)
- NCC(X,n) computes the normalized cross correlation of a surface
patch at X with normal n by projecting it into all visible images
- ¯κ denotes the mean curvature
ξ−δ = (1 −NCC(X −δn, n))/2
ξ0 = (1 −NCC(X, n))/2
ξ+δ = (1 −NCC(X + δn, n))/2
if ξ−δ < ξ+δ, ξ0 then
δp = −0.5δ
wp = (ξ0 −ξ−δ)/δ
else if ξ+δ < ξ−δ, ξ0 then
δp = 0.5δ
wp = (ξ0 −ξ+δ)/δ
else
δp = 0.5(ξ−δ −ξ+δ)/(ξ−δ + ξ+δ −2ξ0)δ
wp = 0.5(ξ−δ + ξ+δ −2ξ0)/δ
end if
δs = −¯κn
δµ = η
P
i∈R exp(−∥X−Xi∥)(µ(X)−µ(Xi))(1−|⟨X−Xi,n⟩|/∥X−Xi∥)
P
i∈R exp(−∥X−Xi∥)
wµ = 3ρξ0/δ(ξ−δ + ξ0 + ξ+δ)
X′ = X + (wpδp + wsδs + wµδµ)/(wp + ws + wµ)n
facial expression. We handle this by working in a darkened room,
sending a signal to all cameras to open their apertures for two sec-
onds and triggering the external ﬂash with a one second delay. The
cameras in the studio setup were manual-focus, and they were refo-
cused and the calibration repeated for each new subject. The con-
sumer stereo camera that we used is the Fuji Real 3D W1 shown in
Figure 1. It has a stereo baseline of 77mm, and probably marks the
appearance of a new market in consumer stereo photography. The
auto-focus of the Fuji could not be disabled. This meant that the
calibration parameters must have changed in the interval between
capturing the calibration sphere and capturing the face, but this did
not cause any obvious degradation of the results5. For both sys-
tems, images were down-sampled once due to the Bayer color-ﬁlter
pattern before input to the software.
The compute time, from image input to output of a 3D model, takes
around 20 minutes6. This is for software that has had no optimiza-
tion or parallelization yet, and we believe that we can reduce com-
pute time to a few minutes and possibly further. A related matter of
practical usefulness is that the stereo matching is pyramidal and it is
straightforward to quickly generate models at the lower-resolution
layers for preview and checking. Model generation takes a few sec-
onds at the lowest-resolution (150x150 pixel) layer for example.
4.2
Quantitative Evaluation
This section contains results for a physical mask of known ground-
truth. The mask was created by taking a plaster-cast of a face, scan-
ning with laser, and printing on an Object Connex 500 3D printer.
Figure 9 shows the mask which is half a face, not a full face, due to
an unwanted limitation at the time of our experiments. Error is mea-
sured as perpendicular distance between the registered ground-truth
model and recovered model. The errors are listed in Table 1 and
their distribution is shown in Figure 9. For comparison, the phys-
5In fact, this was a beneﬁcial side-effect of the calibration method that
the surface of the calibration sphere coincides with the subsequent position
of the surface of the face, so auto-focus does not much change camera pa-
rameters.
6Compute times with the seven-camera studio setup and the Fuji binoc-
ular camera were similar, The reason is that the Fuji images are noisier and
the reﬁnements in Section 3 took longer, counteracting the effect of fewer
cameras.


Figure 8: Recovered models and synthesized views, for viewpoints different from the original camera images, across subjects of varying
appearance. Our focus has been on skin, and it may be that the hair and specular components - like the eyes, teeth and tongue - beneﬁt from
custom algorithms. But the 3D reconstruction is reasonable across all these parts.
ical resolution of the 3D printer is 0.042 mm. The error statistics
include regions like the nostrils (scale ∼5 mm), where the algo-
rithm did not reconstruct because the nostril interior is invisible in
the images. Thus, the errors are an over-estimate in the sense that
they include this source, but removal would have invalidated the
objectivity of the result. Figure 10 provides a visual comparison
of the ground-truth and recovered models. The details in the re-
covered model are slightly less deﬁned but recovery of mesoscopic
geometry is substantially correct.
Average [mm]
Median [mm]
Angular [◦]
PMVS
0.132 ± 0.19
0.096
6.989 ± 7.97
W/o Meso
0.092 ± 0.13
0.070
8.690 ± 7.69
With Meso
0.088 ± 0.12
0.067
5.675 ± 6.03
Table 1: Absolute error values for the ground-truth experiment de-
scribed in Section 4.2. The angular error measures the angular
difference of the normals. The reﬁnement with mesoscopic term is
superior in all cases. We included a comparison to PMVS [Fu-
rukawa and Ponce 2007] for completeness, however we want to
point out that their method is a general-purpose MVS, while ours is
tailored to face-reconstruction.
Figure 9: (a) Physical mask of known ground-truth; (b) Recovered
model color-coded by error; (c) Distribution of the signed absolute
error between the ground-truth and the registered recovered model.
Measured errors are not directly applicable to real faces because
the surface reﬂectance of the face mask is different from human
skin, with reduced specularity for example, but the results are in-
formative to ﬁrst-order. These experiments have also suggested an
interesting possibility for future work - latest-generation 3D print-
ers have sophisticated material handling, and it might be possible to
print a mask whose reﬂectance properties are a better approxima-
tion to skin.
Figure 10: Left: image of the physical mask; Center: rendering of
the recovered model; Right: rendering of the physical mask.
4.3
Qualitative Evaluation
Figure 8 shows results for a variety of subjects of varying gender,
ethnicity, age, and facial expression. Figure 11 demonstrates high-
ﬁdelity reconstruction for a subject with geometric variation in the
skin at a range of scales. Figure 12 shows both the subtle deforma-
tions of mesoscopic detail in distorted areas as well as their consis-
tency in regions that do not undergo deformation. Figure 13 shows
results for a subject with dark-colored skin.
Figure 11: Recovered model for a face with geometric variation in
the skin at a range of scales.
Figure 14 shows models recovered for highly-transient facial ex-
pression. The subject slapped his own cheek causing a fast-moving


Figure 14: Top: Images of a subject slapping himself and causing a shock-wave in the face. Bottom: the respective reconstructions.
Figure 12: Recovered models of a subject for two different expres-
sions.
Figure 13: Recovered model for a face with dark-colored skin.
shock-wave across the face. As discussed in Section 4.1, our cur-
rent studio setup is not capable of continuous capture, and the ﬁg-
ure is showing results for multiple captures at different times, not
a single shock-wave. The results illustrate the advantage of single-
shot capture - a time-multiplexed system would require specialized
high-speed hardware and high light-levels for this case.
Figure 15 shows results for capture from the Fuji camera. Image
capture with the Fuji under normal ambient light yielded very noisy
images, most likely due to the relatively small 1/2.3 inch sensor
size. Doing the capture with a bright diffuse light source solved this
problem and yielded the required image quality. The face model
has less coverage than with the studio setup, because this is a small
baseline stereo camera taking a frontal view.
Figure 15: Left: Images from the Fuji binocular-stereo camera.
Center: the recovered model. Right: Close-up of a region around
the eye.
5
Discussion
Robustness: We used two contrasting capture systems, the ﬁrst a
studio setup with seven prosumer SLR cameras plus indirect light-
ing, and the second a consumer binocular-stereo camera. This illus-
trates system behavior on a spectrum ranging from careful capture
of high-quality images to point-and-shoot capture of lower-quality
images with lens distortion. It further illustrates system behavior on
the spectrum of varying camera conﬁguration, ranging from cam-
eras all around the front hemisphere of the head to binocular stereo
with a small baseline. Both capture methods yield good quality
face models, providing evidence that our calibration method and
run-time system are robust to changing camera conﬁguration and
changing image characteristics.
We have built face models for
around twenty different subjects at this stage, with multiple cap-
tures for some of the subjects. Our system works on all captures,
without the need to tune the software for individual cases.
Current Limitations: Specularity on the face is a problem when
doing capture under direct lighting, occurring for example when
the tip of the nose reﬂects a bright light source. Specular areas typ-
ically distort the mesh. Ways to deal with this include preventing it
from happening in the ﬁrst place by using indirect lighting or cross-
polarization, or post-processing to explicitly detect the affected area
and create a plausible reconstruction.
6
Conclusions and Future Work
The best current methods to obtain high-quality face models use
active light, and they offer reliability and accuracy. For example,
laser is noted for its ability to produce point measurements of sub-
millimeter accuracy, while gradient-based illumination has the abil-
ity to accentuate detail and enhance recovery of ﬁne-scale 3D ge-
ometry. However active methods impose constraints such as the


need for special-purpose hardware, for subjects to be still, or for
projected light that is intrusive due to high-brightness or strobing.
In contrast, passive stereo vision uses single-shot capture under
standard light sources.
And commodity cameras now routinely
have the image resolution to reveal individual skin pores, so that
faces provide the kind of dense evenly-distributed texture that is
perfect for stereo matching and 3D reconstruction. This paper has
demonstrated the capabilities of a state-of-the-art passive stereo
system for face scanning. It competes with active systems in re-
liability and quality for high-end applications, but it is low-cost,
and versatile enough to work off a consumer stereo camera. We
demonstrated an augmented type of stereo reﬁnement to qualita-
tively recover pore-scale geometry and yield improved visual real-
ism in synthesized faces. Our current system is in snapshot mode,
but leads naturally on to future work on image sequences. In con-
clusion, we believe that this work demonstrates that passive stereo
has matured into a robust technology for capturing models of the
face, and that its advantages will support new types of deployment.
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Nick Apostoloff and Nori Kanazawa from
Image Movers Digital for their valuable input and XYZ RGB Inc.
for providing the ground-truth model. We also wish to thank Peter
Kaufmann for his framework and all of our subjects for letting us
capture and publish their faces, especially Manuel Lang.
References
ALEXANDER, O., ROGERS, M., LAMBETH, W., CHIANG, M.,
AND DEBEVEC, P. 2009. The Digital Emily Project: Photoreal
facial modeling and animation. ACM Trans. Graph..
BEELER, T., BICKEL, B., BEARDSLEY, P., SUMNER, B., AND
GROSS, M. 2010. High-quality single shot capture of facial
geometry: Implementation details. Tech. Rep. 671, ETH Zurich.
BRADLEY, D., HEIDRICH, W., POPA, T., AND SHEFFER, A.
2010. High resolution passive facial performance capture. ACM
Trans. Graph..
CHEN, T., GOESELE, M., AND SEIDEL, H. 2006. Mesostructure
from specularity. CVPR.
DI3D. 2009. Dimensional imaging. http://www.di3d.com.
DONNER, C., AND JENSEN, H. 2006. A spectral bssrdf for shading
human skin. Eurographics Symposium on Rendering.
DONNER, C., WEYRICH, T., D’EON, E., RAMAMOORTHI, R.,
AND RUSINKIEWICZ, S. 2008. A layered, heterogeneous re-
ﬂectance model for acquiring and rendering human skin. ACM
Trans. Graph..
FURUKAWA, Y., AND PONCE, J. 2007. Accurate, dense, and ro-
bust multi-view stereopsis. CVPR.
GLENCROSS, M., WARD, G., MELENDEZ, F., JAY, C., LIU, J.,
AND HUBBOLD, R. 2008. A perceptually validated model for
surface depth hallucination. ACM Trans. Graph..
GOLOVINSKIY, A., MATUSIK, W., PFISTER, H., RUSINKIEWICZ,
S., AND FUNKHOUSER, T. 2006. A statistical model for syn-
thesis of detailed facial geometry. ACM Trans. Graph..
HARTLEY, R., AND ZISSERMAN, A. 2000. Multiple View Geom-
etry, second ed. Cambridge University Press.
HERNANDEZ, C., VOGIATZIS, G., AND CIPOLLA, R. 2008. Shad-
ows in three-source photometric stereo. ECCV.
HIEP, V., KERIVEN, R., LABATUT, P., AND PONS, J. 2009. To-
wards high-resolution large-scale multi-view stereo. CVPR.
HYNEMAN, W., ITOKAZU, H., WILLIAMS, L., AND ZHAO, X.
2005. Human face project. SIGGRAPH 2005 Courses.
INTEL. 2001. Opencv reference manual. http://developer.intel.com.
KAZHDAN, M., BOLITHO, M., AND HOPPE, H. 2006. Poisson
surface reconstruction. In SGP.
MA, W., HAWKINS, T., PEERS, P., CHABERT, C., WEISS, M.,
AND DEBEVEC, P. 2007. Rapid acquisition of specular and dif-
fuse normal maps from polarized spherical gradient illumination.
Rendering Techniques.
MERRELL, P., AKBARZADEH, A., WANG, L., MORDOHAI, P.,
FRAHM, J., YANG, R., NISTER, D., AND POLLEFEYS, M.
2007. Real-time visibility-based fusion of depth maps. ICCV.
MEYER, M., DESBRUN, M., SCHR ¨ODER, P., AND BARR, A. H.
2003. Discrete differential-geometry operators for triangulated
2-manifolds. In Visualization and Mathematics III.
NEHAB, D., RUSINKIEWICZ, S., DAVIS, J., AND RAMAMOOR-
THI, R. 2005. Efﬁciently combining positions and normals for
precise 3d geometry. ACM Trans. Graph..
PARKE, F. 1974. A parametric model for human faces. PhD Thesis,
University of Utah.
PIGHIN, F., AND LEWIS, J. 2005. Digital face cloning. ACM
Trans. Graph..
ROBERT, L., AND DERICHE, R. 1996. Dense depth map recon-
struction: A minimization and regularization approach which
preserves discontinuities. In ECCV.
SCHARSTEIN, D., AND SZELISKI, R. 1996. Stereo matching with
non-linear diffusion. CVPR.
SCHARSTEIN, D., AND SZELISKI, R. 2002. A taxonomy and eval-
uation of dense two-frame stereo correspondence algorithms.
IJCV.
SEITZ, S., CURLESS, B., DIEBEL, J., SCHARSTEIN, D., AND
SZELISKI, R. 2006. A comparison and evaluation of multi-view
stereo reconstruction algorithms. CVPR.
SIFAKIS, E., NEVEROV, I., AND FEDKIW, R. 2005. Automatic
determination of facial muscle activations from sparse motion
capture marker data. ACM Trans. Graph..
SVOBODA,
T.
Multi
camera
self-calibration.
http://cmp.felk.cvut.cz/ svoboda/SelfCal/index.html.
TORRALBA, A., AND FREEMAN, W. 2003. Properties and appli-
cations of shape recipes. CVPR.
WEISE, T., LEIBE, B., AND GOOL, L. V. 2007. Fast 3D scanning
with automatic motion compensation. CVPR.
WEISE, T., LI, H., GOOL, L., AND PAULY, M. 2009. Face/off:
live facial puppetry. SCA.
WEYRICH, T., MATUSIK, W., PFISTER, H., BICKEL, B., DON-
NER, C., TU, C., MCANDLESS, J., LEE, J., NGAN, A.,
JENSEN, H., AND GROSS, M. 2006. Analysis of human faces
using a measurement-based skin reﬂectance model. ACM Trans.
Graph..
WOODFORD, O., TORR, P., REID, I., AND FITZGIBBON, A.
2008. Global stereo reconstruction under second order smooth-
ness priors. CVPR.
