Title: High-quality passive facial performance capture using anchor frames.

High-Quality Passive Facial Performance Capture using Anchor Frames
Thabo Beeler1,2
Fabian Hahn1
Derek Bradley1
Bernd Bickel1
Paul Beardsley1
Craig Gotsman1,3
Robert W. Sumner1
Markus Gross1,2
1Disney Research Zurich
2ETH Zurich
3Technion - Israel Institute of Technology
Figure 1: High-quality facial performance capture for two actors. The resulting meshes are in full vertex correspondence.
Abstract
We present a new technique for passive and markerless facial per-
formance capture based on anchor frames. Our method starts with
high resolution per-frame geometry acquisition using state-of-the-
art stereo reconstruction, and proceeds to establish a single triangle
mesh that is propagated through the entire performance. Leverag-
ing the fact that facial performances often contain repetitive sub-
sequences, we identify anchor frames as those which contain sim-
ilar facial expressions to a manually chosen reference expression.
Anchor frames are automatically computed over one or even mul-
tiple performances. We introduce a robust image-space tracking
method that computes pixel matches directly from the reference
frame to all anchor frames, and thereby to the remaining frames in
the sequence via sequential matching. This allows us to propagate
one reconstructed frame to an entire sequence in parallel, in con-
trast to previous sequential methods. Our anchored reconstruction
approach also limits tracker drift and robustly handles occlusions
and motion blur. The parallel tracking and mesh propagation of-
fer low computation times. Our technique will even automatically
match anchor frames across different sequences captured on differ-
ent occasions, propagating a single mesh to all performances.
CR Categories:
I.3.3 [COMPUTER GRAPHICS]: Pic-
ture/Image Generation—Digitizing and scanning; I.3.5 [COM-
PUTER GRAPHICS]:
Computational
Geometry and Object
Modeling—Geometric algorithms, languages, and systems;
Keywords: Facial performance capture, space-time geometry re-
construction, motion capture.
Links:
DL
PDF
WEB
VIDEO
1
Introduction
The central role that facial motion plays in computer-generated an-
imation, special effects, games, interactive environments, synthetic
storytelling, and virtual reality makes facial performance capture a
research topic of critical importance. However, the complexity of
the human face as well as our skill and familiarity in interpreting
real-life facial performances makes the problem exceptionally dif-
ﬁcult. A performance capture result must exhibit a great deal of
spatial ﬁdelity and temporal accuracy in order to be an authentic re-
production of a real actor’s performance. Numerous technical chal-
lenges such as robust tracking of facial features under extreme de-
formations and error accumulation over long capture sessions con-
tribute to the problem’s difﬁculty.
We present a reconstruction algorithm based on a multi-camera
setup and passive illumination that delivers a single, consistent
mesh deforming over time to precisely match an actor’s perfor-
mance. By incorporating a high-quality 3D reconstruction tech-
nique [Beeler et al. 2010], the mesh exhibits visually realistic pore-
level geometric detail. Our results demonstrate that our system is
robust to expressive and fast facial motions, reproducing extreme
deformations with minimal drift. Our system requires no makeup
so that temporally varying texture can be derived directly from the
captured video. And, the computation is parallelizable so that long
sequences can be reconstructed efﬁciently using a multi-core im-
plementation.
Our high-quality results derive from two technical innovations.
First, we employ a robust tracking algorithm that integrates tracking
in image space and uses the integrated result to propagate a single
reference mesh to each target frame. This strategy yields results su-
perior to mesh-based tracking techniques for a number of reasons:
(a) The image data typically contains much more detail, facilitating
more accurate tracking. (b) The problem of error propagation due
to inaccurate tracking in image space is dealt with in the same do-
main in which it occurs. (c) There is no complication of distortion
due to parameterization, a technique used frequently in mesh pro-
cessing algorithms. Additionally, because the image-space tracking
is computed for each camera, multiple hypotheses are propagated
forward in time. If one ﬂow computation develops inaccuracies, the
others can compensate.
Although our image-space tracker is accurate for short sequences,
the eventual accumulation of integration error when reconstructing
long capture sessions is unavoidable unless special care is taken.


Our second contribution addresses this issue by employing an “an-
chor frame” concept that relies on the observation that a lengthy
facial performance will contain many frames that are similar in ap-
pearance. For example, when speaking, the face naturally returns
to the resting pose between sentences or during speech pauses. Our
method deﬁnes one frame as a reference frame and then marks all
other frames similar to the reference as anchor frames. Due to the
similarity, our image tracker can compute the ﬂow from the refer-
ence to each anchor independently and with high accuracy. Our
system can then treat each sequence between two consecutive an-
chors independently, integrating the tracking from both sides and
enforcing continuity at the anchor boundaries. The accurate track-
ing of each anchor frame prevents error accumulation in lengthy
performances. And, since the computation of the track between
two anchors is independent, the algorithm can be parallelized across
multiple cores or CPUs. Our method can use anchor frames that
span multiple capture sessions of the same subject on different oc-
casions without any additional special processing. This can be used
to “splice” and “mix and match” unrelated clips, adding a powerful
new capability to the editorial process.
2
Related Work
Data-driven facial animation has come a long way since the marker-
based techniques introduced over two decades ago [Williams 1990;
Guenter et al. 1998]. Current state of the art methods are now pas-
sive and almost fully automatic [Bradley et al. 2010; Popa et al.
2010]. However, a technique for capturing highly-detailed expres-
sive performances that completely avoids temporal drift has yet to
be realized. In this work, we take a step towards this goal with an
anchored reconstruction approach. In this section we review the re-
lated work on facial geometry and motion capture, starting with the
techniques that ﬁt parametric face models to images, followed by
active lighting and marker-based techniques, and ﬁnally discussing
more recent passive reconstruction methods.
Fitting Faces to Images.
One approach to face capture is to start
with a deformable face model (or template) and then determine the
parameters that best ﬁt the model to images or videos of a perform-
ing actor [Li et al. 1993; Essa et al. 1996; DeCarlo and Metaxas
1996; Pighin et al. 1999; Blanz et al. 2003]. Using this approach
the approximate 3D shape and pose of the deforming face can be
determined. However the deformable face tends to be very generic,
so the resulting animations often do not resemble the captured actor.
The face model must also be low-resolution for the ﬁtting methods
to be tractable, so it is usually not possible to obtain the ﬁne details
that make a performance expressive and realistic.
Markers and Active Light.
A common approach for perfor-
mance capture is to track a sparse number of hand-placed mark-
ers or face paint using one or more video cameras [Williams 1990;
Guenter et al. 1998; Lin and Ouhyoung 2005; Bickel et al. 2007;
Furukawa and Ponce 2009]. While these techniques can yield ro-
bust tracking of very expressive performances and are usually suit-
able for a variety of lighting environments, the manual placement
of markers can be tedious and invasive. Furthermore, the markers
must be digitally removed from the videos if face color or texture is
to be acquired. Also, the marker resolution is naturally limited, and
detailed pore-scale performance capture has not been demonstrated
with this approach.
An alternative to placing markers on the face is to project active il-
lumination on the subject using one or more projectors [Wang et al.
2004; Zhang et al. 2004]. While this approach requires less manual
setup, it can be equally invasive to the actor. Acquiring face color
also poses a problem with these methods, as uniform illumination
must be temporally interleaved with the structured light, sacriﬁcing
temporal resolution. A related active-light technique is proposed
by Hernandez and Vogiatzis [Hern´andez and Vogiatzis 2010], who
use tri-colored illumination with both photometric and multi-view
stereo to obtain facial geometry in real-time, however without tem-
poral correspondence. Finally, combining markers and structured
light with a light stage has proven to yield impressive facial perfor-
mance capture results [Ma et al. 2008; Alexander et al. 2009].
Other researchers have recently used controllable lighting in a light
stage setup for facial performance capture. Wilson et al. [2010]
establish temporal correspondence for images under the changing
light conditions of spherical gradient illumination.
This allows
them to combine stereo with photometric normal maps in a tempo-
rally consistent way to generate detailed facial geometry and perfor-
mance capture. Fyffe et al. [2011] propose a comprehensive facial
performance capture system that aims to reconstruct both geome-
try as well as detailed reﬂectance information using gradient illu-
mination and high-speed cameras. However they do not address
temporal correspondence, which is the main focus of our work.
Unlike the marker-based and active light approaches, our method
can capture detailed expressive performances in full temporal cor-
respondence, with an entirely passive approach.
Passive Capture.
Recently, research has focused on passive re-
construction, without requiring markers, structured light or expen-
sive hardware. Beeler et al. [2010] reconstruct pore-scale facial ge-
ometry for static frames. Bradley et al. [2010] perform passive per-
formance capture with automatic temporal alignment, but they lack
pore-scale geometry and fail when confronted with expressive mo-
tions. Other passive deformable surface reconstruction techniques
have been applied to faces [Wand et al. 2009; Popa et al. 2010].
Wand et al. [2009] reconstruct from point cloud data by ﬁtting a
template model. However, their method tends to lead to loss of ge-
ometric detail which is necessary for realistic facial animation. This
is partially resolved in recent work by Popa et al. [2010] who use a
gradual change prior in a hierarchical reconstruction framework to
propagate a mesh structure across frames. Current industry leading
systems for facial performance capture include Mova’s CONTOUR
Reality Capture1 which requires ﬂuorescent makeup, and the pas-
sive system of Dimension Imaging 3D2.
Pure Geometry Approaches.
While image data, due to its supe-
rior resolution and detail, can be an enormous help in tracking 3D
points over time, it is not always available, and sometimes just a se-
quence of 3D point clouds or incompatibly-triangulated 3D meshes
are the input. A number of authors have addressed the problem of
tracking a 3D mesh over time based on pure geometry. An early
approach was described by Anuar and Guskov [2004]. They start
with an initial template mesh that is then propagated through the
frames of the animation, based on a 3D adaptation of the Bayesian
multi-scale differential optical ﬂow algorithm. Since this ﬂow is
invariant to motion in the tangent plane, it is not able to eliminate
“swimming” artifacts during the sequence.
Inspired by the deformation transfer method of Sumner and
Popovic [2004], which allows to “copy and paste” mesh geometry
from one shape to another, Winkler et al. [2008] present an opti-
mization method to track triangle geometry over time combining
terms measuring data ﬁdelity, and preservation of triangle shape.
Shape preservation is achieved by the use of mean-value barycen-
tric coordinates. This also addresses motion in the tangent plane,
eliminating the artifacts present in the results of Anuar and Guskov.
Tracking triangle geometry is intimately related to the prob-
lem of cross-parameterization,
or compatible remeshing of
1www.mova.com
2www.di3d.com


 Image 
Acquisition
Stage 2:
Anchoring
Stage 1: Mesh 
Reconstruction
Stage 4: Mesh 
Propagation
Stage 3: Image-Space Tracking
Stage 5: Refinement
R
R
A
A
A
A
R
a) Frame 
b) Sequence
R
A
A
R
R
Figure 2: System overview. Image acquisition is followed by mesh reconstruction (Stage 1) and anchor frames are detected to partition the
sequence (Stage 2). The image-space tracking step matches the reference frame to all frames in the sequence (Stage 3), and then the reference
mesh is propagated to each frame (Stage 4). Finally, the meshes are reﬁned for a high-quality result (Stage 5).
shapes [Kraevoy and Sheffer 2004], where the objective is to im-
pose a triangle mesh representing one shape onto another, in a
manner which minimizes distortion between the two. Bradley et
al. [2008] have used this approach to track deforming garment ge-
ometry, however their method does not extend to faces since human
skin does in fact distort during a performance.
More recent work by Sharf et al. [2008] tracks pure geometry over
time using a volumetric representation. The main idea behind their
method is that the volume of an object should be approximately
constant over time, thus the ﬂow must be “incompressible”. This
assumption, along with other standard continuity assumptions, reg-
ularizes the solution sufﬁciently to provide a good track.
In our work we explore anchor-based reconstruction with ro-
bust image-space tracking, where similar facial expressions in a
sequence form anchor frames that allow us to limit temporal drift,
match and reconstruct sequences in parallel, and establish corre-
spondences between multiple sequences of the same actor captured
on different occasions. To our knowledge, ours is the ﬁrst approach
to provide all of these features.
3
Passive Facial Performance Capture
This section describes our method for passive facial performance
capture. The input is a sequence of frames of the face, where a
’frame’ is a set of n images acquired at one timestep. The output
is a sequence of 3D meshes, one per frame, which move and de-
form in correspondence with the physical activity of the face. Each
mesh vertex corresponds to a ﬁxed physical point on the face and
maintains that correspondence throughout the sequence within the
bounds of error. Computation of the output meshes takes into ac-
count the image data, a prior on spatial coherence of the surface,
and a prior on temporal coherence of the dynamically deforming
surface. Figure 2 illustrates the ﬁve stages in the method:
• Stage 1: Computation of Initial Meshes. Each frame in the
sequence is processed independently to generate a ﬁrst esti-
mate of the mesh for that frame.
• Stage 2: Anchoring. One frame is manually identiﬁed as
the reference frame (marked “R” in Fig. 2). Frames with
similar image appearance (similar face expression and head
orientation) are detected automatically and labelled as anchor
frames (marked “A” in Fig. 2 and Fig. 3). Anchor frames will
provide a way to partition the complete sequence into clips of
frames for the processing in Stage 3.
• Stage 3: Image-Space Tracking. The goal of this stage is
to track image pixels from the reference frame to each frame
in the sequence. The process starts by tracking image pix-
els from the reference frame to the anchor frames, which is
straightforward because the image appearance in both frames
is, by deﬁnition, similar. This will guide the tracking of im-
age pixels from the reference frame to all other frames in the
sequence. Tracking to the non-anchor frames is performed
sequentially, starting from the nearest anchor frames.
• Stage 4: Mesh Propagation. The tracked image pixels ob-
tained in Stage 3 provide a way to propagate the reference
mesh, which is the mesh computed for the reference frame in
Stage 1, to all frames in the sequence. We use the term mesh
propagation of the reference mesh to mean the computation
of new positions in space of the mesh vertices, in correspon-
dence with physical movement of the face.
• Stage 5: Mesh Reﬁnement.
Previous stages generated a
propagation of the reference mesh to each frame in the se-
quence. This deforming mesh sequence provides an initial
estimate of the face motion, which is reﬁned to enforce con-
sistency with the image data while applying priors on spatial
and temporal coherence of the deforming surface.
The individual stages are described in more detail below.
Terminology - A frame F t is the collection of the images It
c of all
cameras c = 1..n at time t. Tracking image pixels from frame F t
to frame F t′ will be shorthand for tracking image pixels in each
image pair (It, It′)c of all cameras c.


3.1
Stage 1: Computation of Initial Meshes
We begin by recording an actor’s performance from n different
viewpoints, captured with uniform illumination. Each frame in the
sequence is processed independently to generate a mesh for the face
using the 3D reconstruction method in [Beeler et al. 2010]. This
gives us single-shot geometry for each frame with visually realis-
tic pore-level details. There is no temporal correspondence in the
resulting sequence of meshes, i.e. their mesh structure (number of
vertices and triangulation structure) is totally unrelated. The goal of
subsequent stages will be to generate a mesh sequence that is com-
patible, i.e. share a common vertex set and mesh structure, based
on the initial meshes.
3.2
Stage 2: Anchoring
One frame in the sequence is identiﬁed as the reference frame.
This is currently performed manually, however this step could be
automated by analyzing the data and then automatically picking
a repetitive pose. Frames with similar image appearance (similar
face expression and orientation) are detected and labelled as anchor
frames. Anchor frames are used to partition a sequence of frames
into clips as shown in Figure 3. For example, the reference frame
can be chosen with the face in its natural rest expression, and this
will produce anchor frames along the sequence whenever the face
returns to a rest (or similar) expression. Anchoring will be utilized
in Stage 3 where the image-space tracking operates at the level of
clips, eliminating the need to track a lengthy sequence of frames.
A
A
Anchors
Clip
Figure 3: Frames that are similar to the reference frame are la-
belled as anchors. A clip is a sequence of frames bounded by two
anchor frames (an anchor frame might be both the last frame of one
clip and the ﬁrst frame of the next clip).
3.2.1
Motivation
Drift (or error accumulation) in tracking is a key issue when pro-
cessing a long sequence. Anchor frames provide a way to decom-
pose the sequence into clips, effectively allowing multiple starting
points for the processing but still having a common root in the ref-
erence frame. An immediate beneﬁt of this technique is that it nat-
urally allows parallelization of the computation. But the more im-
portant beneﬁt is that it results in periodic resets that prevent the
accumulation of drift when tracking along the sequence. The tech-
nique also conﬁnes catastrophic failures in tracking to the frames in
which they occur, which could arise from occlusion, motion blur,
or the face outside the image.
3.2.2
Identifying Anchor Frames
Our method for using the reference frame to determine anchor
frames proceeds as follows:
• Detect a feature set Sc in image IR
c in the reference frame,
for all cameras c = 1..n. There is no requirement to detect
the same physical face features in the different images. Our
features correspond to a uniform sampling of the images with
a sample rate of 0.05 (every 20th pixel). While we found these
simple features sufﬁcient, more sophisticated features such as
SIFT [Lowe 2004] could be used.
• Perform correspondence matching of Sc between IR
c and It
c
in the target frame F t, for cameras c = 1..n. We employ
normalized cross-correlation with 9 × 9 windows centered on
each feature pixel.
• Compute an error score E as the sum of the cross-correlation
scores over all features in all feature sets Sc. Label the target
frame as an anchor frame if E is below a predeﬁned threshold.
Figure 4 shows the variation in E for a few example frames.
60
80
100
120
140
160
180
200
220
240
260
280
Frame number
Error score
Figure 4: The reference frame is compared with all frames in the
sequence. Frames where the image appearance is similar are la-
belled as anchor frames.
3.3
Stage 3: Image-Space Tracking
The goal of this stage is to track image pixels from the reference
frame to each frame in the sequence. As stated previously, tracking
pixels between frames is shorthand for tracking pixels in each cam-
era in the frames. The basic method of ﬁnding correspondence is
block-based matching using normalized cross-correlation.
However, there are two distinct situations for matching. The an-
chor frames identiﬁed in Stage 2 have, by deﬁnition, similar im-
age appearance to the reference frame. Thus image correspondence
is straightforward. The unanchored frames, however, may contain
quite different facial expressions from the reference face and cannot
be reliably matched directly.
Matching is done independently per clip, using the clips that were
generated in Stage 3.2. Correspondence from the reference frame is
ﬁrst obtained for the anchor frames, as described in Section 3.3.1.
These correspondences are then propagated from the anchor frames
bounding the clip to the intermediate unanchored frames within the
clip, both forwards and backwards, as described in Section 3.3.3.
3.3.1
Tracking from Reference Frame to Anchor Frames
The orientation and expression of the face in anchor frames is sim-
ilar to that in the reference frame, but its location within the frame
might differ substantially. Thus the matching uses an image pyra-
mid to detect large motions. The process starts at the coarsest level
of the pyramid and matches a sparse set of features (we again use
uniform image samples) to estimate extremal motions m±, fol-
lowed by the dense motion estimation method described in Sec-
tion 3.3.2 using a search window of size [(m+
x −m−
x ) × (m+
y −
m−
y )]. The resulting motion ﬁeld is upsampled to the next higher
resolution and the dense motion estimation is repeated but now with
a search window of ﬁxed size (3×3). This is repeated until the high-
est resolution layer is reached. This is done for each anchor frame
to provide the motion ﬁelds uR→A
c
from the reference frame R to
anchor frame A for cameras c = 1..n.
3.3.2
Dense Motion Estimation
The motion estimation is an extension to 2D of the matching intro-
duced in [Beeler et al. 2010] and has the following steps:


Matching.
A pixel x in image IR
c is matched to its best match x′
in image IA
c using 3 × 3 block-based normalized cross-correlation
with the search window introduced in 3.3.1. This provides the for-
ward motion estimation u = x′ −x. The matching is run also in
the reverse direction from IA
c to IR
c starting from x′ to provide the
backward motion estimation v = ¯x −x′, where ¯x is the pixel in
IR
c that backward matches x′.
Filtering.
A match is not accepted for pixels where ∥u + v∥is
larger than a threshold (one pixel).
Re-Matching.
Unmatched pixels are re-matched using accepted
neighbor matches for guidance. This process is iterated until all
unmatched pixels are matched.
Reﬁning.
The computed matches are reﬁned by combining two
terms, one for photometric consistency of the match in the two im-
ages, and one which uses a depth map to prevent smoothing over
depth discontinuities. Depth maps are obtained from the meshes
computed in Stage 1, reprojected back onto the images.
The original formulation of the reﬁned motion in [Beeler et al.
2010] is a convex combination u′ = (wpup + wsus)/(wp + ws).
The weights wp and ws and the photometric term up are as in the
original reference, but the regularization term us is modiﬁed based
on the depth map δ and the matching error ξ
us (x, y) =
X
(x′,y′)∈N (x,y)
wx′,y′ · ux′,y′
where wx′,y′ := exp
„
∥δx′,y′ −δx,y∥2
σ2
«
(1−ξx′,y′) and N denotes
the neighborhood of (x, y), i.e. the 8 neighboring pixels. The value
of σ is 1mm in our experiments.
3.3.3
Tracking from Reference Frame to Unanchored Frames
Direct tracking of pixels from the reference frame to the unanchored
frames is not reliable because image appearance can differ substan-
tially between the two. Instead the matching between the reference
frame and the anchor frames obtained in Section 3.3.1 is used to aid
the process. Frames are tracked incrementally within a clip starting
from the relevant anchor frames. The pixel tracking information
from the reference frame to the anchor frame, plus the incremental
frame-to-frame matching, is used to infer the pixel tracking from
the reference frame to the individual unanchored frames.
uR→t
c
= uR→A
c
+
X
i<t
ui→i+1
c
This generates a motion ﬁeld for each unanchored frame, which is
reﬁned as described in Section 3.3.2. This last step allows the mo-
tion ﬁeld to self-correct for small drift with respect to the reference
frame (track-to-ﬁrst principle).
Each clip is bound by a start and end anchor frame, and the pixel
tracking above is done from the start anchor in the forward direction
and from the end anchor in the backward direction. The forward
and backward motion ﬁelds may differ due to error. This is resolved
by computing an error ﬁeld for each motion ﬁeld, smoothing the er-
ror ﬁelds to remove local perturbation, and then taking the lowest
smoothed error to obtain the best match at each pixel. Individual
pixels may vary in their assignment of either forward or backward
propagation, however the local error (and thus, assignment of prop-
agation) tends to be temporally coherent. Any inconsistencies are
resolved in the reﬁnement process described in Stage 5.
3.4
Stage 4: Mesh Propagation
The reference mesh consists of a set of vertices XR
i for the refer-
ence frame, obtained in Stage 1. Each vertex represents a physical
point on the face. The goal of mesh propagation to a frame F t
in the sequence is to ﬁnd the transformed 3D position Xt
i of each
vertex XR
i due to the motion and deformation of the face from the
reference frame to frame F t.
Stage 3 has provided the motion ﬁelds from reference frame F R to
F t. The method for using the motion ﬁelds to estimate the propa-
gated vertices Xt
j is similar to [Bradley et al. 2010]. Each vertex
XR
i is projected onto the camera images in F R, and the correspond-
ing motion vectors from the per-camera motion ﬁelds are applied.
Back-projecting from the new pixel locations onto the initial geom-
etry for frame F t (obtained in Stage 1) gives a per-camera estimate
of the propagated 3D position. Estimates are weighted by the dot
product between the surface normal and the camera view vector.
Spatial clustering is used to identify outliers, and then the ﬁnal es-
timate is obtained from a weighted average within the best cluster.
Mesh propagation is now complete and vertices XR
i are in corre-
spondence with vertices Xt
i in every frame F t.
3.5
Stage 5: Mesh Reﬁnement
Previous stages have generated a propagation of the reference mesh
to each frame in the sequence. This is a step closer to the goal
stated earlier, to have temporal correspondence of meshes along the
sequence. However the propagated meshes have been computed
with different methods (for anchor frames and unanchored frames)
and computed independently for each timestep. The reﬁnement de-
scribed in this section updates the meshes to ensure a uniform treat-
ment in the computation of all frames and to apply temporal coher-
ence. There are two stages—a reﬁnement that acts independently
on each frame and can thus be parallelized, and a reﬁnement that
aims for temporal coherence between frames.
3.5.1
Reﬁnement per Frame
The goal of the per-frame reﬁnement is to ﬁnd for each vertex the
position in space that optimizes the following objectives:
• Spatial image ﬁdelity - The reprojections in all visible cam-
eras for frame F t should be similar.
• Temporal image ﬁdelity - The reprojections in frames F t and
F R for each visible camera should be similar.
• Mesh ﬁdelity - The transformed mesh M t should locally be
similar to the reference mesh M R.
• Geometry smoothness - The transformed geometry should be
locally smooth.
To render the process robust and efﬁcient we follow the proposition
of Furukawa et al. [2009] and treat motion and shape separately.
The reﬁnement is an iterative process in 2.5D that interleaves mo-
tion and shape reﬁnement.
Shape Reﬁnement.
Shape is reﬁned along the normal. We em-
ploy the shape reﬁnement framework from [Beeler et al. 2010],
which aims to ﬁnd vertex displacements X′ that jointly satisfy pho-
tometric consistency constraints, surface smoothness constraints,
and mesoscopic position estimates,
X′ = (wpXp + wsXs + wµXµ)/(wp + ws + wµ).
We refer to [Beeler et al. 2010] for the derivation of the photometric
Xp, smooth Xs and mesoscopic Xµ positions as well as the pho-


tometric wp and mesoscopic wµ weights. To produce smoother so-
lutions in areas of higher matching error (eye-brows, nostrils, etc.)
we modify the smoothness weight to be
ws = λs
0 + λs
1ξ + λs
2ξ2
where ξ is the matching error and λs is a user deﬁned smooth-
ness coefﬁcient vector.
For all examples in this paper we use
λs = [0.03, 0.7, 1000].
Motion Reﬁnement.
Motion is reﬁned in the tangent plane of
each vertex. Similar to the shape reﬁnement process, we ﬁnd vertex
displacements X′ that jointly satisfy photometric consistency and
mesh regularization,
X′ = (wpXp + wsXs)/(wp + ws).
In this case, the photometric position estimate Xp is the position on
the tangent plane that maximizes photometric consistency between
current and reference frame. We use normalized cross-correlation
as a measure of consistency and compute it by reprojecting corre-
sponding surface patches into the reference image IR
c and the cur-
rent image It
c for all cameras c.
The regularized position estimate Xs for motion reﬁnement as-
sumes local rigidity of the surface and tries to preserve the local
structure using Laplacian coordinates, as in [Bradley et al. 2010].
The photometric conﬁdence wp is the sum of the matching errors
for the neighboring positions on the tangent plane
wp = 0.25(ξx±dx,y + ξx,y±dy)
The regularized conﬁdence ws employs a polynomial
ws = λm
0 + λm
1 ξx,y + λm
2 ξ2
x,y
For all examples in this paper we use λm = [0.5, 1, 8000].
3.5.2
Reﬁnement across Frames
The per-frame reﬁnement in the previous section operates on each
frame independently, and can thus be run in parallel. The results are
not guaranteed to be temporally consistent but consecutive frames
will be very similar by construction. While temporal error in the
motion estimate is mostly imperceptible, small differences in shape
between successive frames can cause changes in surface normals,
which will produce subtle but noticeable ﬂickering in the visualiza-
tion. To avoid this we do a ﬁnal pass over the complete sequence
averaging the Laplacian coordinates in a [-1,+1] temporal window.
This is implemented as an iterative process.
3.6
Acquisition Hardware
Our performance capture algorithm requires that the actor be illumi-
nated by bright uniform light and recorded by n ≥2 synchronized
video cameras. While our technique does not depend on any spe-
ciﬁc hardware, we describe the acquisition setup used to generate
the results in this paper for completeness.
All of our datasets were acquired using seven cameras (Dalsa Fal-
con 4M60) capturing images with a resolution of 1176 × 864 pix-
els at 42 frames per second and an exposure time of 8ms. Cam-
era synchronization is essential for dynamic performance capture,
and these cameras offer automatic hardware synchronization with a
global shutter. Note that our method does not require professional
high-speed video cameras (as used by Fyffe et al. [2011]), which
would increase the cost of the system.
The actors were lit uniformly using an array of LED-lights. The
lights are arranged in a spherical conﬁguration for constant uniform
illumination, akin to the USC light stage [Ma et al. 2007; Wilson
et al. 2010; Fyffe et al. 2011]. However, unlike previous approaches
we do not require polarized light or complex controllable light pat-
terns. The simple LED-lights used by Bradley et al. [2010] would
also be sufﬁcient for our technique.
4
Results
We validate our method by reconstructing several performances
given by three different actors. Our results cover a wide range of
expressiveness, they include visually realistic pore-level geometry,
and they demonstrate our method’s robustness to motion blur and
occlusions, outperforming previous approaches.
Figure 5 shows a number of frames from our ﬁrst actor, including
an input image (ﬁrst row), resulting geometry (second row), the
geometry rendered with a grid pattern to show the temporal motion
over time (third row), and the ﬁnal result rendered using per-frame
color information projected from the video images. This result,
while demonstrating the expressive quality of our reconstructions,
also illustrates how we can match a reference frame across multiple
capture sequences - the ﬁrst three expressions in Figure 5 come
from sequences that were captured on different occasions, however
they are still in full vertex correspondence.
Reconstructed sequences from two additional actors are shown in
Figure 6, demonstrating the versatility of our approach. Here we
show several frames in chronological order, illustrating how the
temporal reconstruction remains faithful to the true facial motion
using an overlaid grid pattern. The result in the top row of Figure 6
particularly highlights the ﬁne-scale spatio-temporal details that our
method is able to produce.
One of the key innovations that our method relies on is our robust
image-space tracking approach for deriving the temporal face mo-
tion. By dealing with error propagation directly in image space, we
are able to produce more accurate motion reconstruction with less
drift than techniques that rely on a potentially-distorted parameter-
ization domain for drift correction, such as the approach of Bradley
et al. [2010] (referred to just as ’Bradley et al’ in the rest of this
section). We illustrate this in Figure 7, where a short sequence of
raising an actor’s eyebrows to create wrinkles is reconstructed with
both our approach and the method of Bradley et al. The initial ge-
ometry comes from Beeler et al. [2010] in both cases. Our method
produces more detailed ﬁnal geometry since we do not rely so heav-
ily on spatial regularization, but also our method exhibits less drift
accumulation. This can be seen in the latter three images, which
show how the overlaid grid pattern deforms over time, from the
ﬁrst frame, to the most wrinkled frame, and then to a later frame
after the wrinkles have dissipated. The temporal reconstruction of
Bradley et al. is shown in yellow on the left half of the forehead,
while our result is shown in blue on the right. A more regular grid
pattern at the end of the sequence indicates that our approach is less
susceptible to drift accumulation.
The second main contribution of our work is the application of an-
chor frames to address the problems associated with sequential mo-
tion processing, such as the unavoidable tracker drift over long se-
quences, and complete tracking failure caused by very fast motion
or occlusions. With our anchor frame reconstruction framework we
can recover from such tracking failure, as we demonstrate in Fig-
ure 8. This result shows a sequence of lip movements in which the
upper lip is occluded by the lower lip in the third image. Since


Figure 5: Example frames taken from multiple different sequences of an actor. Top row: the images from one camera. Row 2: computed
geometry. Row 3: geometry rendered with a grid pattern to enable a qualitative evaluation. Row 4: rendering of the computed mesh. In this
ﬁgure, a single reference frame was the basis for processing multiple sequences of the actor, so the computed meshes are consistent (i.e. have
corresponding mesh vertices) across all of the results.
tracking of the upper lip fails, the system incorrectly predicts that
the motion of the upper lip drifts down onto the lower lip, indicated
by the overlaid grid. Sequential tracking methods would have trou-
ble recovering from this situation. However, due to an anchor frame
later in the sequence, our method is able to successfully track the
upper lip backwards from the anchor frame to the occluded frame,
automatically restoring tracking after the occlusion.
The combination of robust image space tracking and anchor frames
allows us to successfully reconstruct very fast motions, even those
containing motion blur. We demonstrate this in Figure 9, which
contains a short sequence of an actor opening his mouth very
quickly, and we compare our result again to the method of Bradley
et al. Our method is able to produce a more accurate reconstruction.
Analysis.
Here we assess the behavior of our algorithm under
varying numbers of anchor frames. This assessment, depicted in
Figure 10, demonstrates that our algorithm is relatively insensitive
to the number of anchor frames, when present in typical amounts.
For this analysis we ran our tracking method 9 times on the same
sequence, using the same reference frame but varying the anchor
frames. The sequence consists of 400 frames and contains a number
of expressive as well as neutral poses, as illustrated by the images
at the bottom of the ﬁgure. In 4 of the executions the anchor frames
are manually selected (with 1, 3, 5 and 8 anchors), and in the other
executions they are automatically selected based on the matching
error (which is graphed in the background in purple); these 5 exe-
cutions chose anchor frames that had the highest 10, 25, 50, 75 and
100 percentile matching error. At the low end, with only 1 anchor
frame, we expect drift to accumulate since tracking is sequential
(as in previous methods). At the high end, with 100% anchors, the
method should degenerate completely because there is no frame-to-
frame tracking at all. However, with a reasonable number of anchor
frames we expect the results to be stable. We have no ground truth
for measuring the difference between executions, so we chose the
result with 8 anchors as the baseline for comparison. These an-
chor frames approximately partition the sequence into individual
expressions bounded by neutral poses, which is exactly the situa-
tion where we expect our method to perform best. For each other
result sequence, we measure the average image-space tracking er-
ror for each frame in pixels, compared to the baseline result, and
accumulate the error across the sequence. This accumulated error
is shown in the horizontal bar chart on the right side of the ﬁgure.
As expected, using only 1 anchor frame produces signiﬁcant error
due to drift accumulation. When the number of anchor frames is
very high the error is also large because many frames do not match


Figure 6: Example on other subjects, showing frames pulled out at different time steps through a sequence. Low temporal drift is demon-
strated by the consistent attachment of the superimposed grid pattern to the physical face surface.
Figure 7: A comparison with the method of Bradley et al. - From left to right: a zoom onto the forehead in an input image, 3D reconstruction
of Bradley et al, our 3D reconstruction showing improved ﬁdelity. The next three images show results for Bradley et al on the left-side of the
head and our results on the right-side, for three time steps starting with unwrinkled forehead, then wrinkled forehead, then back to unwrinkled.
Changes in the attachment of the superimposed grid to the face between the ﬁrst and last images demonstrate drift in the tracking, with our
method showing signiﬁcantly less drift.
well to the reference frame directly. However, using anywhere from
3 anchors to 10% of the frames as anchors produces similar results,
indicating that our algorithm is relatively insensitive to the number
of anchor frames.
Our initial presentation of the concept of anchoring involved a sin-
gle reference frame. It may happen that a given reference frame
does not yield a good distribution of anchor frames in the whole se-
quence, so that the beneﬁts of anchor-based reconstruction are lost
in some places. In this case, it is not necessary to maintain the same
reference frame for the entire sequence. A subset of the sequence
can be matched to one reference frame, followed by a change of
the reference frame to one of the processed frames, if the switch
would yield a better anchor frame distribution for the remainder of
the sequence. The result shown in the latter three frames of Fig-
ure 5 is generated in this way, where the reference frame starts off
as a neutral expression and then switches to a pose with the mouth
open, since the mouth remains open for most of the sequence. The
two reference frames would need to be in full vertex correspon-
dence, but by switching the reference to a frame that has already
been processed, the correspondence between the two frames is di-
rectly available.
Please see the supplemental material for video results of all datasets
and comparisons in the paper.
5
Discussion
This paper presents a performance capture algorithm that can ac-
quire expressive facial performances with visually-realistic pore-
level geometric details. Here we discuss some of the research op-
portunities for extending the system.
In common with previous methods, we do not expect to obtain a
faithful 3D reconstruction of the eye geometry or facial hair, since
these tend to violate stereo and temporal brightness constancy as-
sumptions in image space. Visual artifacts may also be seen at the
mesh boundaries, however these can easily be cleaned in a post-
process.
Our image-space tracking requires a stereo deployment where all
cameras capture the full face. This contrasts with a stereo deploy-
ment like that of Bradley et al [2010], where the cameras are op-
tically zoomed to capture small patches of the face, and a single
point on the face often migrates between stereo views during a se-
quence3. Our approach could be extended to this situation if we
were to combine the stereo images into one image, for example us-
ing the “unwrap mosaics” method of Rav-Acha et al. [2008].
The reference frame is matched to the anchor frames in image
space, as described in Section 3.2. A more ﬂexible approach, and
a straightforward extension, would be to do the matching in 3D
via the meshes that are computed in Stage 1 of the pipeline. Thus
matching would succeed whenever facial expression is the same in
the reference and anchor frames, and would no longer require a
similar orientation of the head relative to the cameras.
Anchoring can be a powerful tool for integrating multiple face per-
formances of an actor over an extended period. As shown in the re-
sults section, a reference frame can be taken from one sequence but
used to generate anchor frames in another sequence. This provides
a way to propagate a single mesh across different capture sessions
3For this reason we are not able to reconstruct the original datasets of
Bradley et al. Instead we ran their tracking algorithm on our capture data
for the comparison.


Figure 8: Several frames from a sequence in which there is signif-
icant occlusion and reappearance of structure around the mouth.
Our method of anchor frames combats this by partitioning the se-
quence into clips, and doing image-space tracking from the start
and end of each clip.
for an actor (including the case where the camera positions or cali-
bration may have changed somewhat between the sessions), and to
embed the full corpus of facial performance data for the actor into
a single coordinate frame.
An extension of the work here would be to use multiple reference
frames simultaneously. For example, facial performance capture
could be applied to a sequence in which an actor adapts a set of
FACS poses [Ekman and Friesen 1978] with careful supervision to
yield best possible results. The frames with the FACS poses could
then be used as a set of high quality reference frames that could be
used simultaneously when processing subsequent sequences (be-
cause the meshes have consistent triangulation).
Finally we believe that there is an interesting new avenue for re-
search in segmenting the face, and applying the concept of anchored
reconstruction at the level of individual parts of the face. This re-
lates to a contribution of our work, which was to show how a long
image sequence can be decomposed into anchored clips for 3D re-
construction. Face segmentation will provide an orthogonal way of
decomposing the process, and we plan to explore this extension.
6
Conclusion
We have presented a new passive technique for high-quality facial
performance capture, based on two key technical innovations. First,
we employ a robust tracking algorithm that integrates all of the pixel
tracking in image space and uses the integrated result to propagate
a single reference mesh to each target frame in parallel. Second,
leveraging the fact that facial performances tend to contain repeti-
tive motions, we introduce “anchor frames” deﬁned as those where
the facial expression is similar to the reference frame. After lo-
cating the anchor frames automatically, we compute pixel tracking
directly from the reference frame to anchor frames. By using the an-
chor frames to partition the sequence into clips and independently
matching clips, we are able to bound tracker drift, correctly handle
occlusion and motion blur, and process capture sequences in paral-
Figure 9: Left: a zoom onto the mouth for several frames in a
sequence in which there is fast facial motion and motion blur in the
images. Center: the reconstruction of Bradley et al. Right: our
reconstruction, with greater ﬁdelity around the mouth.
100 %
# Anchors
Matching error
Anchor Frame
Acc. Avg. Diﬀerence [px]
75 %
50 %
25 %
10 %
8
5
3
1
87.93
41.71
6.92
4.97
1.83
-
1.26
1.94
30.90
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
0
Figure 10: Analysis of quantity and placement of anchor frames.
lel. We can even match frames between multiple capture sessions
recorded on different occasions, yielding a single deformable mesh
that corresponds to every performance an actor gives.
Our method produces detailed 3D geometry in full temporal corre-
spondence, even for the most expressive of performances under-
going very fast motion, without the requirement of hand-placed
markers or face makeup. We have demonstrated our technique on
a number of example performances given by different actors, and
have also shown how our anchored-reconstruction approach com-
bined with our robust image-space tracking method can yield more
accurate results than a current state-of-the-art technique [Bradley
et al. 2010], particularly in the presence of motion blur and highly
expressive wrinkles where drift tends to accumulate faster.
To our knowledge, ours is the ﬁrst method to passively reconstruct
3D facial performances with visually realistic pore-level geometric
details, while demonstrating robustness to fast motions. A system


of this type would be very useful for facial animation applications,
such as performance transfer from one actor to another, in particu-
lar given the high-resolution geometry and expressive motions our
method is able to reconstruct.
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank our actors: Sean Sutton, Leila Gangji and
Johann Gangji. Many thanks also to Maurizio Nitti and Gioacchino
Noris for the artistic help with our results and ﬁgures.
References
ALEXANDER, O., ROGERS, M., LAMBETH, W., CHIANG, M.,
AND DEBEVEC, P. 2009. The digital Emily project: photoreal
facial modeling and animation. In ACM SIGGRAPH Courses,
1–15.
ANUAR, N., AND GUSKOV, I. 2004. Extracting animated meshes
with adaptive motion estimation. In Proc. Vision, Modeling, and
Visualization, 63–71.
BEELER, T., BICKEL, B., SUMNER, R., BEARDSLEY, P., AND
GROSS, M. 2010. High-quality single-shot capture of facial
geometry. ACM Trans. Graphics (Proc. SIGGRAPH), 40.
BICKEL, B., BOTSCH, M., ANGST, R., MATUSIK, W., OTADUY,
M., PFISTER, H., AND GROSS, M. 2007. Multi-scale capture
of facial geometry and motion.
ACM Trans. Graphics (Proc.
SIGGRAPH), 33.
BLANZ, V., BASSO, C., VETTER, T., AND POGGIO, T. 2003. Re-
animating faces in images and video. Computer Graphics Forum
(Proc. Eurographics) 22, 3, 641–650.
BRADLEY, D., POPA, T., SHEFFER, A., HEIDRICH, W., AND
BOUBEKEUR, T.
2008.
Markerless garment capture.
ACM
Trans. Graphics (Proc. SIGGRAPH), 99.
BRADLEY, D., HEIDRICH, W., POPA, T., AND SHEFFER, A.
2010. High resolution passive facial performance capture. ACM
Trans. Graphics (Proc. SIGGRAPH), 41.
DECARLO, D., AND METAXAS, D.
1996.
The integration of
optical ﬂow and deformable models with applications to human
face shape and motion estimation. In Proc. CVPR, 231–238.
EKMAN, P., AND FRIESEN, W. 1978. The facial action coding
system: A technique for the measurement of facial movement.
In Consulting Psychologists.
ESSA, I., BASU, S., DARRELL, T., AND PENTLAND, A. 1996.
Modeling, tracking and interactive animation of faces and heads
using input from video. In Proc. Computer Animation, 68.
FURUKAWA, Y., AND PONCE, J. 2009. Dense 3D motion capture
for human faces. In Proc. CVPR, 1674–1681.
FYFFE, G., HAWKINS, T., WATTS, C., MA, W.-C., AND DE-
BEVEC, P. 2011. Comprehensive facial performance capture.
Comp. Graphics Forum (Proc. Eurographics) 30, 2, 425–434.
GUENTER, B., GRIMM, C., WOOD, D., MALVAR, H., AND
PIGHIN, F. 1998. Making faces. In Comp. Graphics, 55–66.
HERN ´ANDEZ, C., AND VOGIATZIS, G. 2010. Self-calibrating a
real-time monocular 3D facial capture system. In Proceedings
International Symposium on 3D Data Processing, Visualization
and Transmission (3DPVT).
KRAEVOY, V., AND SHEFFER, A. 2004. Cross-parameterization
and compatible remeshing of 3D models. ACM Trans. Graph.
23, 861–869.
LI, H., ROIVAINEN, P., AND FORCHEIMER, R. 1993. 3-D mo-
tion estimation in model-based facial image coding. IEEE Trans.
Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell. 15, 6, 545–555.
LIN, I.-C., AND OUHYOUNG, M. 2005. Mirror mocap: Automatic
and efﬁcient capture of dense 3D facial motion parameters from
video. The Visual Computer 21, 6, 355–372.
LOWE, D. G. 2004. Distinctive image features from scale-invariant
keypoints. Int. J. Comput. Vision 60, 2, 91–110.
MA, W.-C., HAWKINS, T., PEERS, P., CHABERT, C.-F., WEISS,
M., AND DEBEVEC, P. 2007. Rapid acquisition of specular and
diffuse normal maps from polarized spherical gradient illumina-
tion. In Eurographics Symposium on Rendering, 183–194.
MA, W.-C., JONES, A., CHIANG, J.-Y., HAWKINS, T., FRED-
ERIKSEN, S., PEERS, P., VUKOVIC, M., OUHYOUNG, M.,
AND DEBEVEC, P. 2008. Facial performance synthesis using
deformation-driven polynomial displacement maps. ACM Trans.
Graphics (Proc. SIGGRAPH Asia) 27, 5, 121.
PIGHIN, F. H., SZELISKI, R., AND SALESIN, D. 1999. Resyn-
thesizing facial animation through 3D model-based tracking. In
Proc. ICCV, 143–150.
POPA, T., SOUTH-DICKINSON, I., BRADLEY, D., SHEFFER, A.,
AND HEIDRICH, W. 2010. Globally consistent space-time re-
construction. Comp. Graphics Forum (Proc. SGP), 1633–1642.
RAV-ACHA, A., KOHLI, P., ROTHER, C., AND FITZGIBBON, A.
2008. Unwrap mosaics: A new representation for video editing.
ACM Trans. Graphics (Proc. SIGGRAPH), 17.
SHARF, A., ALCANTARA, D. A., LEWINER, T., GREIF, C.,
SHEFFER, A., AMENTA, N., AND COHEN-OR, D.
2008.
Space-time surface reconstruction using incompressible ﬂow.
ACM Trans. Graphics 27, 110.
SUMNER, R. W., AND POPOVI´C, J. 2004. Deformation transfer
for triangle meshes. ACM Trans. Graphics 23, 399–405.
WAND, M., ADAMS, B., OVSJANIKOV, M., BERNER, A.,
BOKELOH, M., JENKE, P., GUIBAS, L., SEIDEL, H.-P., AND
SCHILLING, A. 2009. Efﬁcient reconstruction of nonrigid shape
and motion from real-time 3D scanner data. ACM Trans. Graph.
28, 2, 1–15.
WANG, Y., HUANG, X., LEE, C.-S., ZHANG, S., LI, Z., SAMA-
RAS, D., METAXAS, D., ELGAMMAL, A., AND HUANG, P.
2004. High resolution acquisition, learning and transfer of dy-
namic 3-D facial expressions.
Comp. Graphics Forum 23, 3,
677–686.
WILLIAMS, L. 1990. Performance-driven facial animation. In
Computer Graphics (Proc. SIGGRAPH), vol. 24, 235–242.
WILSON, C. A., GHOSH, A., PEERS, P., CHIANG, J.-Y., BUSCH,
J., AND DEBEVEC, P.
2010.
Temporal upsampling of per-
formance geometry using photometric alignment. ACM Trans.
Graphics 29, 2.
WINKLER, T., HORMANN, K., AND GOTSMAN, C. 2008. Mesh
massage. The Visual Computer 24, 775–785.
ZHANG, L., SNAVELY, N., CURLESS, B., AND SEITZ, S. M.
2004. Spacetime faces: High resolution capture for modeling
and animation. ACM Trans. Graphics 23, 3, 548–558.
