Title: Chatgarment: Garment estimation, generation and editing via large language models

ChatGarment: Garment Estimation, Generation and Editing
via Large Language Models
Siyuan Bian1,2
Chenghao Xu1,3
Yuliang Xiu1,4
Artur Grigorev1,5
Zhen Liu1,6
Cewu Lu2
Michael J. Black1
Yao Feng7,8,†
1Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems
2Shanghai Jiao Tong University
3EPFL
4Westlake University
5ETH Z¨urich
6Mila, University of Montreal
7Meshcapade
8Stanford University
chatgarment.github.io
“Estimate the sewing pattern”
“I want to have a long-sleeve”
(a) Input image
(b) Estimated sewing pattern, 3D garment, and its animation
(c) Input garment
(e) Edited garment
(d) Edited sewing pattern
Figure 1. As a multimodal 3D garment creator, ChatGarment understands both images and language. It can estimate complex 3D garments represented as
sewing patterns from a single image, which can be easily animated and simulated. It also supports garment editing based on text instructions.
Abstract
We introduce ChatGarment, a novel approach that lever-
ages large vision-language models (VLMs) to automate the
estimation, generation, and editing of 3D garments from
images or text descriptions. Unlike previous methods that
struggle in real-world scenarios or lack interactive edit-
ing capabilities, ChatGarment can estimate sewing patterns
from in-the-wild images or sketches, generate them from text
descriptions, and edit garments based on user instructions,
all within an interactive dialogue. These sewing patterns
can then be draped on a 3D body and animated. This is
achieved by finetuning a VLM to directly generate a JSON
file that includes both textual descriptions of garment types
and styles, as well as continuous numerical attributes. This
JSON file is then used to create sewing patterns through a
programming parametric model. To support this, we refine
the existing programming model, GarmentCode, by expand-
ing its garment type coverage and simplifying its structure
for efficient VLM fine-tuning. Additionally, we construct a
†This work was done while YF was at Meshcapade.
large-scale dataset of image-to-sewing-pattern and text-to-
sewing-pattern pairs through an automated data pipeline.
Extensive evaluations demonstrate ChatGarment’s ability
to accurately reconstruct, generate, and edit garments from
multimodal inputs, highlighting its potential to simplify work-
flows in fashion and gaming applications. Code and data
are available at https://chatgarment.github.io/.
1. Introduction
Imagine seeing a photo of someone in a nice looking outfit
that you would like for yourself or your 3D avatar. Our goal
is to take that photo and convert it into a 2D sewing pattern
and then enable the user to use language to edit the pattern,
for example, making the sleeves longer or editing the neck-
line. We then drape the garment on a 3D body and animate
it. This is illustrated in Fig. 1. With this approach, given just
an image and/or text, we construct sewing patterns for 3D
garments that can be immediately used in fashion or gaming
applications. This lightweight process is in stark contrast
to how sewing patterns and 3D garments are traditionally
created by an artist or clothing designer. In contrast to the
traditional labor-intensive process, our approach exploits
arXiv:2412.17811v3  [cs.CV]  3 Apr 2025


large vision-language models (VLMs) for the first time to
democratize the capture and design of clothing.
Recent work explores the generation or estimation of 3D
clothing using text and/or images as input [6, 8, 21, 44].
These methods use various 3D representations including
3D meshes, point clouds, or implicit representations like
Unsigned Distance Functions (UDFs) and Signed Distance
Functions (SDFs). We observe, however, that most cloth-
ing is designed and manufactured using 2D patterns, and
posit that this is a more natural representation. Sewing pat-
terns can be seamlessly integrated into existing garment
design pipelines for animation and manufacturing. Recent
approaches [16, 32, 35] use sewing patterns for garment
estimation and generation, but mapping images or text to
sewing patterns remains challenging due to limited training
data, leading to poor generalization across diverse clothing
types. These methods also does not support interactive edit-
ing, making post-processing labor-intensive for 3D artists.
Fortunately, recent work, such as GarmentCode [25, 26],
provides a programmatic framework for encoding garment
information into a JSON file. This JSON file includes tex-
tual descriptions of garment types, styles and numerical
attributes, offering a rich representation of sewing patterns.
The JSON file is then processed by the GarmentCode frame-
work to produce 2D sewing patterns, which can subsequently
be draped on a 3D body. However, to date, there is no auto-
mated method to directly extract a GarmentCode representa-
tion (JSON file) from an image or text description.
Our observation is that a JSON file resembles natural lan-
guage, making it suitable for interpretation by large language
models (LLMs). At the same time, Vision-LLMs (VLMs)
excel at understanding images and garment concepts, such
as types of garments and specific features like long sleeves.
If we enable the VLM to translate its garment understanding
into the structured format of GarmentCode, then it becomes
capable of generating sewing patterns. This allows the VLM
to take an image as input and output a garment, while also
supporting garment generation and editing through text de-
scriptions or interactive dialogue.
Specifically, we introduce ChatGarment, a method that
finetunes a VLM to take text queries, optionally with images,
as input and outputs a JSON garment file. This JSON file
is then used for GarmentCode generation. The JSON file
includes textual descriptions of garment types (e.g., skirts,
pants), styles (e.g., collar type), and continuous numerical
attributes (e.g., pant length). Inspired by previous work [11,
14, 27], we introduce a new token (<ENDS>) to represent
these numerical values and train an MLP projection layer
to decode them from the token embedding. Those numbers,
combined with the VLM’s language output, are formatted
into the final JSON file. In our approach, we keep the VLM’s
vision encoder fixed, fine-tune the language model using
LoRA [18], and jointly train the MLP projection layer. To
adapt GarmentCode [25] for more efficient VLM training,
we create an improved version that supports a wider range of
clothing types (e.g. open-jacket) and removes unnecessary
settings to reduce token usage in training. We also develop an
automated data construction pipeline that leverages existing
tools for garment generation, draping, simulation, rendering,
and automatic labeling with GPT-4o. This pipeline enables
building a dataset with image-to-GarmentCode and text-to-
GarmentCode pairs, including 20K new garments and 1M
images with detailed descriptions, supporting both garment
creation and editing.
We evaluate ChatGarment across a diverse set of tasks, in-
cluding those specifically trained for, and novel applications
that demonstrate the generalization capabilities of VLMs.
For single-image garment reconstruction, ChatGarment out-
performs prior sewing-pattern-specific and LLM-based mod-
els on the Dress4D [57] and CloSE [2] evaluation datasets.
Additionally, we demonstrate garment editing, generation,
and multi-turn dialogue, highlighting our approach’s ver-
satility. ChatGarment can flexibly use text and images to
create and edit 3D garments that can be readily animated,
introducing a new workflow for garment design.
We summarize our contributions as follows:
• A unified model capable of estimating, generating and
editing sewing patterns from multimodal inputs.
• The first approach to leverage VLMs for directly generat-
ing JSON files for garment creation.
• A refined version of GarmentCode that supports more
diverse garment types and is optimized for VLM training.
• An automatic data construction pipeline for generating
image-to-sewing-pattern and text-to-sewing-pattern data,
along with the release of a large-scale dataset.
2. Related Work
Garment Creation. Most 3D garments have predefined
templates (e.g., sewing patterns) and categories (e.g., skirts,
shirts, pants, dresses, etc.), but their non-rigid nature makes
them highly deformable with dynamic motions. Efforts to
create 3D garments can be grouped into “template-based” or
“free-form” methods, based on their 3D representations.
A line of template-based approaches register predefined
garment templates to 2D observations, which could be
real captures, e.g. from monocular video [5, 21, 38, 44]
and images [3, 6, 7, 65], generated data [51], or derived
from the “proxy gradient” computed from 2D diffusion
models [28, 49] via score distillation sampling (SDS) [43].
When the template is classified correctly, the predefined
garment template, refined through a coarse-to-fine step, en-
sures topological stability and correctness. Unfortunately,
template-based methods struggle to accurately model gar-
ments that deviate from the predefined templates, particularly
those with diverse styles, such as long skirts, or garments
that undergo topological changes, like opening a jacket.


To address these limitations, free-form representations
like (un)signed distance functions [6, 8, 52, 62], occupancy
fields [47, 48, 59, 60], tetrahedrons [20, 37, 50], and point
clouds [39, 40] are leveraged. However, this flexibility can
compromise the inherent structure of garments, potentially
leading to non-garment shapes and floating artifacts. Without
shape regularization, incomplete observations lead to the
reconstructed unseen parts being overly smooth. Even worse,
rigging or simulating these free-form garments becomes
extremely challenging.
The sewing pattern is a well-balanced solution – with
pre-defined yet flexible templates. Several methods exploit
sewing patterns to reconstruct 3D garments. MulayCap [53]
estimates the parameters of a sewing pattern from a monocu-
lar video. ISP [32] parameterizes sewing patterns as implicit
functions in a 2D space. Using ISP as a garment represen-
tation, GarmentRecovery [31] trains a feedforward network
to infer sewing patterns from in-the-wild photos. Neural-
Tailor [24] uses an RNN to produce more complex sewing
patterns from point clouds. Wang et al. [56] learn a shared
garment shape space that can be inferred from multimodal
input such as sketches, SewFormer [35] uses a transformer
to infer multi-panel patterns from monocular images, and
DressCode [16] estimates quantized sewing patterns with
a GPT-based model from text inputs. Despite promising
results, these approaches are limited to basic sewing pat-
terns, featuring only front and back panels, or constrained
by the limited sewing patterns seen in the training data. Ad-
ditionally, none of the above works have explored using
programming parametric sewing patterns, such as Garment-
Code [25, 26] to create more complex garments, either in
generation or reconstruction.
VLMs for 3D tasks.
With their broad understanding
of the world, LLMs and VLMs are widely used to rea-
son about 3D. There has been significant work on gen-
erating, editing, and analyzing 3D objects and scenes
[13, 17, 19, 33, 46, 54, 61, 64]. While these methods show
the power of VLMs to reason about objects, they do not
address our problem of representing 2D patterns that corre-
spond to 3D shapes – this is a special property of garments.
Some attempts have been made to connect sewing patterns
with language, such as DressCode [16]. This motivates us
to present ChatGarment, which connects a large language
model to GarmentCode, sharing a similar approach to recent
strategies [11, 34] by finetuning LLMs [18, 36, 45]. Powered
by VLMs, ChatGarment significantly improves generaliza-
tion and robustness in reconstructing out-of-domain images
and increases diversity in 3D clothing generation. It also sup-
ports sewing pattern editing and multi-turn dialogue, greatly
simplifying the 3D garment workflow.
VLM
GarmentCode
Language 
Instruction
Image
Simulatable Garment
Sewing 
Pattern
Figure 2. Pipeline of ChatGarment. ChatGarment takes text or an
image as input and generates a JSON file. The JSON file is decoded
into 2D sewing patterns using GarmentCode [25] and then draped
onto the human body. The final 3D garments are compatible with
simulation software (e.g., MAYA, Blender, Style3D, etc.).
3. Method
3.1. Pipeline
The goal of ChatGarment is to simplify the workflow of
garment creation by automatically estimating, generating,
and editing garments from multimodal image and text input.
To achieve this, we finetune LLaVA [34], a multimodal large
language model fϕ. It takes an input image Xv and text
prompts Xq, and produces a textual response Yt as Yt =
fϕ(Xq, Xv) or Yt = fϕ(Xq) in the absence of an image.
From this output, a structured JSON file Jt is extracted as
a subset of Yt, which will be decoded into sewing patterns
using the GarmentCode [25] decoder Dg. This pipeline is
illustrated in Fig. 2.
LLM-friendly Rich GarmentCode. We use GarmentCode
to convert the JSON file into a 3D garment mesh in the
canonical pose. GarmentCode [25] is a programming para-
metric model that uses a domain-specific language (DSL) for
creating 2D sewing patterns, with a hierarchical JSON struc-
ture to define garment components and stitching rules. These
patterns can be draped onto body models via a warp-based
pattern stitching algorithm [25, 41], and further be simu-
lated easily. GarmentCode can model diverse garments with
intricate geometric details, including different cuts, frills,
and pleats. To better align GarmentCode with our model’s
language-driven requirements, we develop a refined version,
GarmentCodeRC (Richer & Cleaner) with two major im-
provements (see Fig. 3).
First, we modify stitching and panel positioning to better
support diverse garment types, such as open-front jackets,
high-waist skirts, and fitted pant legs. This allows us to
model a broader range of real-world garments and aligns
more closely with natural garment descriptions. Second,
we simplify GarmentCode’s JSON configuration to better
suit LLM training. The original configuration is redundant,
applying the same settings across all garment types. We opti-
mize this by automatically removing irrelevant settings (e.g.,
omitting skirt-related parameters for upper-body garments).
This adjustment reduces the average language token count
from 900 to 350, decreasing ambiguity in LLM training and
improving efficiency. Furthermore, to stabilize model train-


GARMENT CODE [CLEANED]
“pants”: {
“WIDTH” : 1.0 -> 0.5, }
PYTHON SCRIPT
Def new_sample_legwidth(GARMENT_CODE): … 
GARMENT CODE [ORIGIN VERSION]  ×
“shirt” : {
“STRAPLESS” : … ,
“LENGTH”  :  … ,
… },  
“collar” : { … } ,
“sleeve” : {   …   } ,
“pants” : { … } ,
“skirts” : {  …   } ,
…
GARMENT CODE [CLEANED VERSION] √
“shirt” : {
“STRAPLESS”  :  …  , 
“LENGTH” : … ,
… },  
“collar” : {   …   } ,
“sleeve” : {   …   } ,
“pants” : {  …   } ,
“skirts” : { … } ,
GARMENT CODE [CLEANED]
“shirt”: {
“OPENFRONT” : False -> True, }
PYTHON SCRIPT
def new_front_stitching(GARMENT_CODE): … 
GARMENT CODE [CLEANED]
“waistband”: {
“HEIGHT” : 0.0 -> 15.0, }
PYTHON SCRIPT
def new_translation(GARMENT_CODE): … 
Figure 3. GarmentCodeRC. Left: new options to model open-front
jackets, high-waist skirts, and tight pant legs. Right: simplified
JSON configuration for more efficient LLM training.
ing, we normalize all floating-point values to a [0, 1] range.
Examples of the GarmentCodeRC JSON configuration are
given in Sup. Mat. Throughout this paper, “GarmentCode”
refers to our enriched and simplified version.
LLM for Textual and Numeric Outputs. The output JSON
file Jt contains both textual and numeric descriptions. Pre-
vious research [11, 14, 27] has shown that LLMs struggle
in predicting continuous and precise numerical values. To
overcome this, following ChatPose [11, 27], we encode these
continuous values into language token embeddings and train
a projection layer to recover accurate numerical values, such
as garment length. In this setup, the language embedding for
Yt is represented as Ht. From the textual output Yt, upon
encountering the start token <STARTS>, we extract the tex-
tual content of the JSON file, which spans from <STARTS>
to <ENDS>. The language embedding at the end token
<ENDS>, where numeric information is encoded, is repre-
sented as Hn
t . A projection layer uses this embedding to
predict the numerical values as n = gΘ(Hn
t ). Finally, we
merge these numerical values with the textual descriptions
extracted earlier and format them into our final sewing pat-
tern JSON configuration file Jt.
3.2. Automatic Data Construction
To train ChatGarment, we need image-to-JSON and text-to-
JSON paired data. While some work like SewFormer [35]
offers image-to-JSON pairs, they fall short in garment vari-
ety. For example, they lack tight-sleeve garments and only
support a limited variety of skirts. Additionally, text de-
scriptions for garment editing are missing in current datasets.
We address these gaps by developing an automated data
construction pipeline that integrates various resources.
Garment Generation, Simulation, and Rendering. Fol-
lowing GarmentCodeData [26], we sample 20,000 garments
by randomizing values in sewing pattern configurations. To
improve real-world garment relevance, we adjust the sam-
pling ratios and assign lower weights for asymmetric gar-
“shirt”: {
“OPENFRONT” : False, 
…  }
BEDLAM Motion
BEDLAM Texture
Garment Code
3D Garment
(Sewing Pattern)
Garment Sequence
ContourCraft
Garment Simulation
Rendering Engine
Blender
Figure 4. Data Construction Pipeline. We generate garments from
JSON configurations, simulate them with ContourCraft [15] and
render with Blender.
ments and those with intricate cuffs. To create outfits, we
pair top and bottom garments together or use single-piece
items like dresses or jumpsuits. The garment set is draped
on a SMPL-X [42] neutral model.
We automate garment simulation using ContourCraft [15],
chosen for its stability and scalability, with SMPL-X motion
sequences sampled from the BEDLAM dataset [4]. Spe-
cific garment vertices are attached to corresponding body
vertices using predefined rules to prevent garments from
slipping off. For example, the upper edges of pants and
skirts are connected to the nearest body vertices, and simi-
lar attachments are made for upper-body garment vertices
near the shoulders. We filter out simulations with significant
interpenetration or improper positioning in two steps. First,
GarmentCode performs a sewing-pattern validation check,
ensuring the integrity of panel edges and stitching. Second,
we verify simulation results by assessing inter-penetration,
and identify garments at risk of slipping off by inspecting the
proximity of each garment vertex to the nearest body part.
Each garment is then rendered in Blender from four random
perspectives at elevation angles between 0 and 30 degrees,
with garment and body textures sourced from the BEDLAM
dataset. These steps are shown in Fig. 4.
GPT-4o Labeling. The previous method [16] prompts GPT-
4o to generate the general geometric descriptions for gar-
ments, such as the garment types, lengths, widths and sleeve
lengths. However, these general descriptions are insufficient
for garment detail understanding: the finetuned VLM strug-
gles to interpret detailed features of garment components,
such as pant cuffs, or execute specific garment edits. To
address this, we construct a new dataset with low-level de-
scriptions for individual garment parts. For image-based
reconstruction, we instruct GPT-4o to generate descriptions
for all visible garment parts in the image. For garment edit-
ing, we sample 5,000 garment parts (shirt main body, collar,
sleeves, sleeve cuffs, waistband, pant legs, pant cuffs, and
skirts), and use GPT-4o to generate descriptive text for each
part. Assembling these components yields 20,000 new gar-
ments with detailed annotations.


For
garment
editing,
we
randomly
select
two
garments that differ in certain parts, with the edit-
ing
prompt
being:
“Change the garment
sewing pattern by modifying <PART-1>
to <DESC-1>, <PART-2> to <DESC-2>, · · ·
while keeping other parts unchanged.”.
<PART-1>, <PART-2>,
· · ·
represent part names
that differ between the two garments, and <DESC-1>,
<DESC-2> are target garment part descriptions.
We finally build a synthetic dataset of 40K garments and
1 million images with text annotations, supporting garment
reconstruction and editing from multimodal inputs. Plus, we
use GPT-4o to label part-level details of 38K SHHQ [12]
images to make the VLM better understand in-the-wild gar-
ment images. Compared to previous garment sewing pattern
datasets [35], our dataset offers: 1) Diversity: GarmentCode
generates a wider range of real-world garment types; 2) De-
tailed Descriptions: Garments are labeled with detailed
geometric features; 3) Precise Control: Allows for precise,
low-level garment manipulation.
3.3. Training
We use LLaVA [34] as our base VLM and finetune it with
LoRA [18], with its parameters denoted as ϕlora. Addition-
ally, we optimize the LLM token embedding etoken, the
LLM head layer lm headΘ′, and the projection layer gΘ.
Loss Function. As described in Sec. 3.1, the numeric em-
bedding is extracted from the token [ENDS] as Hn
t . An
MLP projection layer maps the embedding Hn
t to 76 float
values n in the JSON configuration. Given the ground truth
text output ˆYt and sewing pattern values ˆn, we optimize
with:
L = CE( ˆYt, Yt) + λn |(ˆn −n) · m| ,
(1)
where the first term is a cross-entropy loss, and the second
term is the L1 difference for numeric values. m is a mask
that filters out irrelevant numeric values, and λn = 0.1 is the
weight for the L1 loss. See more training details in Sup. Mat.
3.4. Multi-turn Dialogue with Multimodal Inputs.
After training, our model can handle multimodal input re-
construction, garment generation, and editing, as reflected in
the training data. Additionally, it exhibits zero-shot reason-
ing for garment sewing patterns within multi-turn dialogues,
despite being trained only on single-turn dialogue datasets.
This enables users to create a garment from an image or text
description and then refine it within the same interaction.
A typical workflow might start with the VLM estimating a
sewing pattern from an image. After reviewing the result, the
user can request specific adjustments, providing a flexible,
user-centered design process (see Fig. 5 for an example).
4. Experiments
We conduct experiments on image-based reconstruction
(Sec 4.1), garment editing (Sec 4.2) and text-based garment
generation (Sec 4.3), along with ablation studies (Sec 4.4).
4.1. Image-based Reconstruction
Benchmarks. We conduct image-based reconstruction ex-
periments on the CloSe [2] and Dress4D [57] datasets. CloSe
is a large-scale scan collection including 3D clothing seg-
mentations across 18 clothing categories. Following CloSe,
we use 145 scans with accurate SMPL-X fits as our vali-
dation set. As CloSe offers limited instances of loose gar-
ments, such as skirts and dresses, we further add samples
from Dress4D, which has real-world outfits recorded us-
ing a multi-view volumetric capture system. We include 4
loose-fitting outfits and 36 images rendered from them.
Implementation Details. Our approach applies the Chain-
of-Thought (CoT) [58] method. We first prompt ChatGar-
ment to generate a text description of the outfit in the image.
The generated text descriptions are combined with the in-
put image to estimate the final garment JSON configuration.
More details are provided in Sup. Mat.
Baselines. We compare our method with two previous ap-
proaches, SewFormer [35] and GarmentRecovery [31]. We
use the publicly available code and checkpoints for these
methods in our evaluation. Additionally, we introduce sev-
eral new baseline models for comparison:
• DressCode. We employ DressCode [16] to generate gar-
ments from image descriptions. Specifically, we utilize
GPT-4o to generate garment descriptions from input im-
ages. These descriptions are processed by DressCode to
create sewing patterns.
• GPT-4o. We design prompt templates and query GPT-4o
using in-context learning (ICL) [10]. We use Garment
Generator [23] as the sewing pattern configuration tool,
as it has significantly fewer possible configurations and
allows for more efficient template design and significantly
fewer conversation rounds. We first prompt GPT-4o to
choose the most suitable template from a predefined list,
then query the parameter value by displaying three gar-
ment renderings with uniformly sampled parameter values.
• LLaVA*. In this setup, we use the LLaVA model to
directly output the numerical values for the sewing pattern
instead of using the sewing pattern projection layer. The
remaining components are identical to our method.
• LLaVA-T. We first employ GPT-4o to generate detailed
textual descriptions of the garment, and ChatGarment is
prompted to reconstruct the sewing pattern based solely
on the text description.
• LLaVA-I. We input the image into the model and prompt
it to directly output the sewing pattern without referring to
text descriptions.


“Estimate the sewing pattern 
of this input image”
“It is [STARTS] 
{‘design’: …} [ENDS]”.
Input Image
3D Garment
(a) Image-based Sewing Pattern Estimation
(b) Image-guided Sewing Pattern Generation
“Generate the upper-body 
sewing pattern similar to input 
image but with long sleeves”
“It is [STARTS] 
{‘design’: …} [ENDS]”.
Input Image
3D Garment
JSON2Garment
JSON2Garment
(c) Text-based Sewing Pattern Generation and Editing
“Generate the sewing pattern 
code for a short skirt”
“Sure, It is [STARTS] 
{‘design’: …} [ENDS]”.
“Edit the skirt to mid-calf length 
without changing its style”
“Sure, It is [STARTS] 
{‘design’: …} [ENDS]”.
“Change this skirt to 
ankle-length long skirt”
“Sure, It is [STARTS] 
{‘design’: …} [ENDS]”.
Figure 5. ChatGarment’s dialog modes. Images and texts are adaptively combined to guide garment generation and editing. Text output
between STARTS and ENDS contains information about the JSON configuration, which is then converted to 3D garments (JSON2Garment)
for visualization and simulation purposes.
Methods
Target-Pose
A-Pose
CD (↓)
F-Score (↑)
CD (↓)
F-Score (↑)
Failure Rate (↓)
Sewformer [35]
27.06
0.55
20.66
0.58
4.3%
DressCode [16]
20.16
0.60
12.12
0.61
11.4%
GarmentRecovery [31]
9.69
0.55
5.75
0.64
-
GPT-4o
11.04
0.62
10.44
0.65
0
LLaVA*
5.29
0.72
6.29
0.76
0
LLaVA-T
6.17
0.72
7.25
0.74
0
LLaVA-I
4.32
0.75
4.93
0.78
0
Ours
3.12
0.75
3.06
0.78
0
Table 1. Quantitative comparisons of Image-based garment re-
construction on Dress4D. ChatGarment achieves the best perfor-
mance on all metrics.
Methods
CLoSE
CD (↓)
F-Score (↑)
Failure Rate (↓)
SewFormer [35]
9.70
0.708
8.33 %
DressCode [16]
15.77
0.616
7.0%
GarmentRecovery [31]
2.39
0.785
-
GPT-4o
3.52
0.755
0
LLaVA*
3.08
0.775
0
LLaVA-T
3.76
0.779
0
LLaVA-I
4.55
0.761
0
Ours
2.94
0.790
0
Table 2. Quantitative comparisons of Image-based reconstruc-
tion on CloSe. The garments are deformed to the target pose.
Since methods use different default human poses, we
apply Linear Blend Skinning [1] to re-pose all garments to
the ground-truth body shape and pose for fair comparison.
Results. We employ the mean chamfer distance, the mean
F-Score at τ = 0.001 and the stitching failure rate as quanti-
tative metrics. As Tab. 1 and Tab. 2 show, ChatGarment sig-
nificantly outperforms existing methods on loose garments
in Dress4D. On the CloSE dataset, which mostly features
tight garments, GarmentRecovery [31] does well by lever-
aging garment segmentation and normal maps as guidance
in an optimization-based framework. However, these cues
are insufficient for accurately reconstructing loose garments.
Our method has similar performance in this case, but is
more general. Also, our algorithm robustly reconstructs gar-
ments with no stitching failures. In contrast, DressCode and
SewFormer often generate invalid garment panels leading
to failed stitching. The primary difference lies in the out-
put format: DressCode and SewFormer predict the panel
edges and stitches of the sewing pattern, while our method
and the GPT-4o-based approach estimate the JSON config-
uration. Although direct edge and stitch prediction offers
greater flexibility in theory, our experiments show that it does
not enhance reconstruction accuracy. Instead, it increases
the likelihood of generating invalid sewing patterns when
handling out-of-distribution (OOD) data.
Our model demonstrates superior performance compared
to LLaVA*, highlighting the effectiveness of the proposed
projection layer.
Furthermore, our CoT-based two-step
reconstruction algorithm outperforms both image-based
(LLaVA-I) and text-based (LLaVA-T) reconstruction base-
lines. The text descriptions detail garment types and styles,
offering valuable information for reconstruction, while im-
ages reveal intricate details that are hard to describe in words.
Thus, combining both text and image inputs is the most ef-
fective strategy for image-based garment reconstruction.
Figure 6 shows our model accurately estimates garment
type, style, and details like skirt hems and collar styles. In
contrast, other methods often misinterpret or overlook these


Input
SewFormer
DressCode
Ours
Garment
Recovery
GPT-4o
Figure 6. Image-based Garment Reconstruction. Unlike SewFormer [35], DressCode [16], GarmentRecovery [31], and the GPT-4o-based
method, which often make mistakes or ignores garments. ChatGarment faithfully captures the shape, style and composition of the garments.
details. SewFormer occasionally fails to reconstruct gar-
ments due to detection or stitching failure, and GarmentRe-
covery lacks support for whole-body dress reconstruction.
Additionally, inaccuracies in 2D garment segmentation [30]
can lead to errors in GarmentRecovery reconstruction.
Garment designers often create image sketches before
making sewing patterns. Surprisingly, despite not being
trained on garment sketch images, ChatGarment demon-
strates strong generalization, accurately predicting garment
types and styles from sketches (Fig. 8).
4.2. Garment Editing
Benchmarks. To evaluate garment editing performance, we
construct an extra evaluation dataset using methods outlined
in Sec. 3.2. We manually select garment pairs with clear
textual descriptions and substantial visual differences. This
dataset consists of 135 garment pairs, each accompanied by
corresponding images and text descriptions. The evaluation
of garment editing involves three components: the source
garment, the target garment, and the editing prompts. The
goal is to derive the sewing pattern for the target garment
using the source garment and the editing prompts.
Implementation Details. For garment editing, we concate-
nate the source garment JSON file and the editing prompt
together and pass it into ChatGarment.
Baselines. We modify DressCode [16] and SewFormer [35]
for comparison with ChatGarment:
• DressCode with edited text. We generate a text descrip-
tion of the edited garment and use DressCode to create
the corresponding sewing patterns. The description is pro-
duced by GPT-4o, which takes as inputs: 1) garment edit-
ing instructions and 2) front and back views of the source
garment. The generated description follows DressCode’s
original input format.
• SewFormer with edited images. We obtain the front
view of the edited garment with TurboEdit [9] to which
we pass 1) the front view of the source garment, 2) the
text description of the source garment, and 3) the editing
instructions, and then use SewFormer to turn the image of
the edited garment into the corresponding sewing pattern.


Prompts: Change the shirt 
body to: [‘long vertical sections', 
‘evenly shaped sides', ‘mildly 
loose fit around upper body', 
‘straight front opening’]
Source
SewFormer
DressCode
Ours
Source
SewFormer DressCode
Ours
Prompts: Change the sleeves to: 
[‘short sleeves length’, ‘loose 
fit around the arms’, ‘wide 
sleeve openings relative to the 
arm size’]
Prompts: Change the collar to: 
[‘rounded neckline’, ‘slightly 
loose fit’, ‘even curvature 
throughout’]
Prompts: Change the sleeves to: 
[‘long, full-length sleeves’, 
‘loose fit’, ‘ends at wrist level’, 
‘wide openings at the wrist’]
Prompts: Change the pant legs 
to: [‘wide-leg silhouette’, 
‘ankle-length hem’, ‘flowy fit’, 
‘loose and relaxed cut’]
Prompts: Change the shirt 
body to: [‘straight vertical 
silhouette’, ‘moderate fit 
around the torso’, ‘hemline falls 
above the knees’]
Figure 7. Results on Garment Editing. We present six examples where the models (SewFormer [35], DressCode [16], and ChatGarment)
edit the source garment shown in the source image according to the given editing instructions in the prompt boxes.
Input
3D Garment
2D Sewing Pattern
Figure 8. Reconstruction results from garment sketches. The
generated garments accurately capture the shape and style of the
input sketch, despite our model being trained without sketches.
Results. We compare our method with SewFormer and
Dresscode on Chamfer Distance and F-score in Tab. 3, where
our approach demonstrates superior performance. The qual-
itative results in Fig. 7 show that our method accurately
modifies the targeted garment parts according to the input
prompt. In contrast, SewFormer and DressCode often fail to
precisely follow the prompt instructions and frequently alter
other unintended areas of the garment.
4.3. Text-based Generation
Following DressCode [16], we use GPT-4o to generate 150
highly diverse text labels from 85 selected in-the-wild im-
ages featuring various tops, skirts, pants, and dresses. Next,
we render the generated 3D garments with default textures
and compute the CLIP score using the provided text labels.
See quantitative results in Tab. 4. Our model achieves a
higher CLIP score compared to DressCode [16], highlighting
the superior prompt-following capabilities of our approach.
The qualitative results are shown in Sup. Mat.
Methods
CD (↓)
F-Score (↑)
SewFormer [35]
28.77
0.548
DressCode [16]
10.97
0.750
Ours
2.51
0.893
Table 3. Quantitative comparisons for garment editing. ChatGar-
ment outperforms other two methods by a large margin.
Methods
CLIP score (↑)
DressCode [16]
22.8
Ours
23.7
Table 4. Quantitative comparisons for text-based garment gener-
ation. ChatGarment achieves a higher CLIP score than DressCode,
indicating better alignment with the text inputs.
4.4. Ablation
We evaluate the impact of different aspects of ChatGarment,
including multi-modal LLM backbones, and various training
datasets. Please refer to Sup. Mat.
5. Conclusion
We introduce ChatGarment, a VLM-based model that esti-
mates garments from images and generates or edits garments
based on text descriptions. Leveraging the capabilities of
LLMs, ChatGarment supports multi-turn dialogue interac-
tions for 3D garment design. It surpasses existing sewing
pattern-specific and LLM-based methods in accurately es-
timating sewing patterns from a single image. While Chat-
Garment excels in many areas, it may struggle with precise
garment editing. For instance, altering the skirt length might
unintentionally affect other parts of the garment. This is-
sue could be addressed with more detailed text instructions
or a differential CSG optimizer [63] for finer adjustments.
Nonetheless, ChatGarment offers the first VLM-based frame-
work for unified garment estimation, generation, and editing.
Future directions could include expanding into garment man-
ufacturing design or improving clothing simulation with
more fine-grained material attributes.


Acknowledgments and Disclosure
We thank Maria Korosteleva for help on GarmentCode, and
Giorgio Becherini for advice on data acquisition and pro-
cessing. Yuliang Xiu is funded by Max Planck Institute for
Intelligent Systems, the Research Center for Industries of
the Future (RCIF) at Westlake University, and the Westlake
Education Foundation.
While MJB is a co-founder and Chief Scientist at
Meshcapade, his research in this project was performed
solely at, and funded solely by, the Max Planck Society.
References
[1] Rinat Abdrashitov, Kim Raichstat, Jared Monsen, and David
Hill. Robust skin weights transfer via weight inpainting. In
SIGGRAPH Asia 2023 Technical Communications, pages 1–4.
2023. 6
[2] Dimitrije Anti´c, Garvita Tiwari, Batuhan Ozcomlekci, Ric-
cardo Marin, and Gerard Pons-Moll. CloSe: A 3D clothing
segmentation dataset and model. In International Conference
on 3D Vision (3DV), 2024. 2, 5, 16
[3] Bharat Lal Bhatnagar, Garvita Tiwari, Christian Theobalt,
and Gerard Pons-Moll. Multi-garment net: Learning to dress
3d people from images. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
international conference on computer vision, pages 5420–
5430, 2019. 2
[4] Michael J Black, Priyanka Patel, Joachim Tesch, and Jin-
long Yang. Bedlam: A synthetic dataset of bodies exhibit-
ing detailed lifelike animated motion. In Proceedings of
the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, pages 8726–8737, 2023. 4
[5] Andr´es Casado-Elvira, Marc Comino Trinidad, and Dan
Casas. Pergamo: Personalized 3d garments from monoc-
ular video. In Computer Graphics Forum, pages 293–304.
Wiley Online Library, 2022. 2
[6] Enric Corona, Albert Pumarola, Guillem Alenya, Ger-
ard Pons-Moll, and Francesc Moreno-Noguer.
Smplicit:
Topology-aware generative model for clothed people. In
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision
and pattern recognition, pages 11875–11885, 2021. 2, 3
[7] R Danˇeˇrek, Endri Dibra, Cengiz ¨Oztireli, Remo Ziegler, and
Markus Gross. Deepgarment: 3d garment shape estimation
from a single image. In Computer Graphics Forum, pages
269–280. Wiley Online Library, 2017. 2
[8] Luca De Luigi, Ren Li, Benoit Guillard, Mathieu Salzmann,
and Pascal Fua. Drapenet: Garment generation and self-
supervised draping. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Con-
ference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages
1451–1460, 2023. 2, 3
[9] Gilad Deutch, Rinon Gal, Daniel Garibi, Or Patashnik, and
Daniel Cohen-Or. Turboedit: Text-based image editing using
few-step diffusion models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.00735,
2024. 7
[10] Qingxiu Dong, Lei Li, Damai Dai, Ce Zheng, Jingyuan
Ma, Rui Li, Heming Xia, Jingjing Xu, Zhiyong Wu, Tianyu
Liu, et al. A survey on in-context learning. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2301.00234, 2022. 5
[11] Yao Feng, Jing Lin, Sai Kumar Dwivedi, Yu Sun, Priyanka
Patel, and Michael J. Black. ChatPose: Chatting about 3d
human pose. In CVPR, 2024. 2, 3, 4
[12] Jianglin Fu, Shikai Li, Yuming Jiang, Kwan-Yee Lin, Chen
Qian, Chen-Change Loy, Wayne Wu, and Ziwei Liu. Stylegan-
human: A data-centric odyssey of human generation. arXiv
preprint, arXiv:2204.11823, 2022. 5
[13] Rao Fu, Xiao Zhan, Yiwen Chen, Daniel Ritchie, and Sri-
nath Sridhar. Shapecrafter: A recursive text-conditioned 3d
shape generation model. Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, 35:8882–8895, 2022. 3
[14] Siavash Golkar, Mariel Pettee, Michael Eickenberg, Alberto
Bietti, Miles Cranmer, Geraud Krawezik, Francois Lanusse,
Michael McCabe, Ruben Ohana, Liam Parker, et al. xVal:
A continuous number encoding for large language models.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.02989, 2023. 2, 4
[15] Artur Grigorev, Giorgio Becherini, Michael Black, Otmar
Hilliges, and Bernhard Thomaszewski. Contourcraft: Learn-
ing to resolve intersections in neural multi-garment simula-
tions. In ACM SIGGRAPH 2024 Conference Papers, pages
1–10, 2024. 4
[16] Kai He, Kaixin Yao, Qixuan Zhang, Jingyi Yu, Lingjie Liu,
and Lan Xu. Dresscode: Autoregressively sewing and gen-
erating garments from text guidance. ACM Transactions on
Graphics (TOG), 43(4):1–13, 2024. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 16, 17
[17] Yining Hong, Haoyu Zhen, Peihao Chen, Shuhong Zheng,
Yilun Du, Zhenfang Chen, and Chuang Gan. 3d-llm: Injecting
the 3d world into large language models. Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, 36:20482–20494, 2023. 3
[18] Edward J Hu, Yelong Shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu,
Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang, and Weizhu Chen. LoRA:
Low-rank adaptation of large language models. In ICLR,
2022. 2, 3, 5, 14
[19] Ziniu Hu, Ahmet Iscen, Aashi Jain, Thomas Kipf, Yisong
Yue, David A Ross, Cordelia Schmid, and Alireza Fathi.
Scenecraft: An llm agent for synthesizing 3d scenes as
blender code. In Forty-first International Conference on Ma-
chine Learning, 2024. 3
[20] Yangyi Huang, Hongwei Yi, Yuliang Xiu, Tingting Liao, Ji-
axiang Tang, Deng Cai, and Justus Thies. TeCH: Text-guided
Reconstruction of Lifelike Clothed Humans. In International
Conference on 3D Vision (3DV), 2024. 3
[21] Boyi Jiang, Juyong Zhang, Yang Hong, Jinhao Luo, Ligang
Liu, and Hujun Bao. Bcnet: Learning body and cloth shape
from a single image. In Computer Vision–ECCV 2020: 16th
European Conference, Glasgow, UK, August 23–28, 2020,
Proceedings, Part XX 16, pages 18–35. Springer, 2020. 2
[22] Diederik P Kingma. Adam: A method for stochastic opti-
mization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6980, 2014. 14
[23] Maria Korosteleva and Sung-Hee Lee. Generating datasets
of 3d garments with sewing patterns.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2109.05633, 2021. 5
[24] Maria Korosteleva and Sung-Hee Lee. Neuraltailor: Recon-
structing sewing pattern structures from 3d point clouds of
garments. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG), 41(4):1–16,
2022. 3


[25] Maria Korosteleva and Olga Sorkine-Hornung. GarmentCode:
Programming parametric sewing patterns. ACM Transaction
on Graphics, 42(6), 2023. SIGGRAPH ASIA 2023 issue. 2,
3, 12, 16, 17
[26] Maria Korosteleva, Timur Levent Kesdogan, Fabian Kem-
per, Stephan Wenninger, Jasmin Koller, Yuhan Zhang, Mario
Botsch, and Olga Sorkine-Hornung. GarmentCodeData: A
dataset of 3D made-to-measure garments with sewing pat-
terns. In Computer Vision – ECCV 2024, 2024. 2, 3, 4, 12,
16
[27] Peter Kulits, Haiwen Feng, Weiyang Liu, Victoria Abrevaya,
and Michael J Black. Re-thinking inverse graphics with large
language models. Transactions on Machine Learning Re-
search, 2024. 2, 4
[28] Boqian Li, Xuan Li, Ying Jiang, Tianyi Xie, Feng Gao,
Huamin Wang, Yin Yang, and Chenfanfu Jiang. Garment-
dreamer: 3dgs guided garment synthesis with diverse geome-
try and texture details. In 3DV, 2025. 2
[29] Minchen Li, Danny M. Kaufman, and Chenfanfu Jiang. Codi-
mensional incremental potential contact. ACM Trans. Graph.
(SIGGRAPH), 40(4), 2021. 14
[30] Peike Li, Yunqiu Xu, Yunchao Wei, and Yi Yang.
Self-
correction for human parsing. IEEE Transactions on Pattern
Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 44(6):3260–3271, 2020.
7
[31] Ren Li, Corentin Dumery, Benoˆıt Guillard, and Pascal Fua.
Garment recovery with shape and deformation priors. In Pro-
ceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition, pages 1586–1595, 2024. 3, 5, 6, 7
[32] Ren Li, Benoˆıt Guillard, and Pascal Fua. Isp: Multi-layered
garment draping with implicit sewing patterns. Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 2024. 2, 3
[33] Dingning Liu, Xiaoshui Huang, Yuenan Hou, Zhihui Wang,
Zhenfei Yin, Yongshun Gong, Peng Gao, and Wanli Ouyang.
Uni3d-llm: Unifying point cloud perception, generation
and editing with large language models.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2402.03327, 2024. 3
[34] Haotian Liu, Chunyuan Li, Qingyang Wu, and Yong Jae Lee.
Visual instruction tuning, 2023. 3, 5, 14
[35] Lijuan Liu, Xiangyu Xu, Zhijie Lin, Jiabin Liang, and
Shuicheng Yan. Towards garment sewing pattern reconstruc-
tion from a single image. ACM Transactions on Graphics
(TOG), 42(6):1–15, 2023. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8
[36] Weiyang Liu, Zeju Qiu, Yao Feng, Yuliang Xiu, Yuxuan Xue,
Longhui Yu, Haiwen Feng, Zhen Liu, Juyeon Heo, Songyou
Peng, Yandong Wen, Michael J. Black, Adrian Weller, and
Bernhard Sch¨olkopf. Parameter-efficient orthogonal finetun-
ing via butterfly factorization. In ICLR, 2024. 3
[37] Zhen Liu, Yao Feng, Yuliang Xiu, Weiyang Liu, Liam Paull,
Michael J. Black, and Bernhard Sch¨olkopf. Ghost on the
shell: An expressive representation of general 3d shapes. In
The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Represen-
tations, 2024. 3
[38] Zhongjin Luo, Haolin Liu, Chenghong Li, Wanghao Du,
Zirong Jin, Yinyu Nie, Weikai Chen, and Xiaoguang Han.
Garverselod: High-fidelity 3d garment reconstruction from a
single in-the-wild image using a dataset with levels of details.
In ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG), 2024. 2
[39] Qianli Ma, Jinlong Yang, Siyu Tang, and Michael J. Black.
The power of points for modeling humans in clothing. In
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on
Computer Vision (ICCV), pages 10974–10984, 2021. 3
[40] Qianli Ma, Jinlong Yang, Michael J. Black, and Siyu Tang.
Neural point-based shape modeling of humans in challenging
clothing. In International Conference on 3D Vision (3DV),
pages 679–689, 2022. 3
[41] Miles Macklin. Warp: A high-performance python frame-
work for gpu simulation and graphics. https://github.
com/nvidia/warp, 2022. NVIDIA GPU Technology
Conference (GTC). 3, 17
[42] Georgios Pavlakos, Vasileios Choutas, Nima Ghorbani, Timo
Bolkart, Ahmed A. A. Osman, Dimitrios Tzionas, and
Michael J. Black. Expressive body capture: 3D hands, face,
and body from a single image. In CVPR, 2019. 4
[43] Ben Poole, Ajay Jain, Jonathan T Barron, and Ben Mildenhall.
Dreamfusion: Text-to-3d using 2d diffusion. In ICLR, 2023.
2
[44] Lingteng Qiu, Guanying Chen, Jiapeng Zhou, Mutian Xu,
Junle Wang, and Xiaoguang Han. Rec-mv: Reconstructing
3d dynamic cloth from monocular videos. In Proceedings of
the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, pages 4637–4646, 2023. 2
[45] Zeju Qiu, Weiyang Liu, Haiwen Feng, Yuxuan Xue, Yao
Feng, Zhen Liu, Dan Zhang, Adrian Weller, and Bernhard
Sch¨olkopf. Controlling text-to-image diffusion by orthogonal
finetuning. In NeurIPS, 2023. 3
[46] Zeju Qiu, Weiyang Liu, Haiwen Feng, Zhen Liu, Tim Z
Xiao, Katherine M Collins, Joshua B Tenenbaum, Adrian
Weller, Michael J Black, and Bernhard Sch¨olkopf. Can large
language models understand symbolic graphics programs?
arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.08313, 2024. 3
[47] Shunsuke Saito, Zeng Huang, Ryota Natsume, Shigeo Mor-
ishima, Hao Li, and Angjoo Kanazawa. PIFu: Pixel-aligned
implicit function for high-resolution clothed human digitiza-
tion. In ICCV, pages 2304–2314, 2019. 3
[48] Shunsuke Saito, Tomas Simon, Jason Saragih, and Hanbyul
Joo. PIFuHD: Multi-Level Pixel-Aligned Implicit Function
for High-Resolution 3D Human Digitization. In CVPR, pages
81–90, 2020. 3
[49] Nikolaos Sarafianos, Tuur Stuyck, Xiaoyu Xiang, Yilei Li, Jo-
van Popovic, and Rakesh Ranjan. Garment3dgen: 3d garment
stylization and texture generation. In 3DV, 2025. 2
[50] Tianchang Shen, Jun Gao, Kangxue Yin, Ming-Yu Liu, and
Sanja Fidler. Deep marching tetrahedra: a hybrid representa-
tion for high-resolution 3d shape synthesis. In Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2021. 3
[51] Yu Shen, Junbang Liang, and Ming C. Lin. Gan-based gar-
ment generation using sewing pattern images. In ECCV, 2020.
2
[52] Astitva Srivastava, Pranav Manu, Amit Raj, Varun Jampani,
and Avinash Sharma. Wordrobe: Text-guided generation of
textured 3d garments. In ECCV, pages 458–475. Springer,
2025. 3
[53] Zhaoqi Su, Weilin Wan, Tao Yu, Lingjie Liu, Lu Fang, Wen-
ping Wang, and Yebin Liu. Mulaycap: Multi-layer human
