Title: D\^ 3-Human: Dynamic Disentangled Digital Human from Monocular Video

D3-Human: Dynamic Disentangled Digital Human from Monocular Video
Honghu Chen
Bo Peng
Yunfan Tao
Juyong Zhang*
University of Science and Technology of China
{honghuc@mail., ustcpbb@mail., taoyf@mail., juyong@}ustc.edu.cn
Figure 1. D3-Human can (b) reconstruct disentangled clothing and body from (a) input video, enabling (c) animation and (d) clothing
transfer after reconstruction. Project page: https://ustc3dv.github.io/D3Human/.
Abstract
We introduce D3-Human, a method for reconstructing
Dynamic Disentangled Digital Human geometry from
monocular videos.
Past monocular video human recon-
struction primarily focuses on reconstructing undecoupled
clothed human bodies or only reconstructing clothing, mak-
ing it difficult to apply directly in applications such as an-
imation production. The challenge in reconstructing de-
coupled clothing and body lies in the occlusion caused by
clothing over the body. To this end, the details of the vis-
ible area and the plausibility of the invisible area must be
ensured during the reconstruction process. Our proposed
method combines explicit and implicit representations to
model the decoupled clothed human body, leveraging the
robustness of explicit representations and the flexibility of
implicit representations.
Specifically, we reconstruct the
visible region as SDF and propose a novel human mani-
fold signed distance field (hmSDF) to segment the visible
clothing and visible body, and then merge the visible and
invisible body. Extensive experimental results demonstrate
that, compared with existing reconstruction schemes, D3-
Human can achieve high-quality decoupled reconstruction
of the human body wearing different clothing, and can be
directly applied to clothing transfer and animation.
1. Introduction
Clothed human body reconstruction has long been a re-
search focus in the fields of graphics and computer vision,
and has a wide range of applications in many fields such
as virtual reality, augmented reality, holographic commu-
nication, film production, and game development. Com-
pared to film-level reconstructions requiring numerous cam-
eras and artists for modeling, reconstructing high-quality
clothed human bodies from monocular videos holds more
practical value for general users. In scenarios such as telep-
resence and virtual try-ons, the 3D avatars used should be
easily accessible, visually realistic, and easy to edit, in-
cluding modifications to clothing and posture. Therefore,
how to reconstruct high-fidelity, decoupled representations
of clothed human bodies using monocular video remains a
long-standing research problem. Through decoupled recon-
struction, clothing can be separated from the human body,
enabling efficient adjustment and editing of different cloth-
ing styles, postures, and body shapes. This decoupling not
only enhances the flexibility and practicality of 3D recon-
struction, but also improves the realism of detailed features,
providing greater potential for personalization and dynamic
interaction of virtual characters.
We aim to develop a method to decouple and reconstruct
the clothed human body from monocular videos. However,
arXiv:2501.01589v1  [cs.CV]  3 Jan 2025


this is a very challenging task because 1) monocular videos
only provide single-view 2D image information and lack
direct 3D depth perception, 2) real captured videos contain
various clothing styles, irregular textures, and complex hu-
man poses, 3) body parts occluded by clothes are not vis-
ible in the input video, which also poses a great challenge
to reconstruction. Existing methods can be divided into ex-
plicit expression methods and implicit expression methods.
Among them, explicit expression methods usually rely on
pre-acquired templates. Some methods [15, 16, 56] use
scanners, while other methods [2, 28, 41] rely on paramet-
ric models [19, 34], and the reconstruction quality mainly
depends on the representation ability of the model. Implicit
representation methods [9, 14, 20, 22, 42] use NeRF [37]
or SDF [40] to model the clothed human body, but they usu-
ally produce an inseparable whole body or exhibit average
geometric quality.
We propose a decoupled human body reconstruction
scheme, named D3-Human (Dynamically Disentangled
Digital Human), which combines explicit and implicit rep-
resentations to address the main challenges of template gen-
eration and the dynamic deformations. In decoupled human
body reconstruction, generating clothing templates is par-
ticularly challenging. Traditional methods, such as those
based on parametric models
[28] or feature lines
[45],
rely heavily on priors, limiting the types of clothing they
can represent. Although implicit unsigned distance field
(UDF) representations [5, 13, 31, 33] provide some solu-
tions, they perform poorly when single-view supervision is
limited (see experiments 4.3). For the visible region, in-
spired by GShell [32] and DMTet [52], we define an opti-
mizable human manifold signed distance field (hmSDF) on
the non-decoupled clothed human surface to separate cloth-
ing from the body. To the best of our knowledge, this is
the first method that can reconstruct clothing geometry from
monocular dynamic human videos without any 3D clothing
priors, using only easily obtainable 2D human parsing seg-
mentation [46]. For the invisible regions of the body, we
adopt the explicit representation of the corresponding re-
gions of the SMPL [34] model to ensure the plausibility
of the body shape and seamless integration with the visi-
ble region. This approach enables detailed and decoupled
reconstruction of clothed human bodies.
We reconstruct different human bodies wearing various
outfits based on monocular videos, to demonstrate the ca-
pabilities of our method. Compared to existing methods
that require over a day [20, 45, 54] for reconstruction,
D3-Human reconstructs a decoupled template of clothing
and body in a much shorter time (about 20 minutes) and
completes the full sequence within several hours, achiev-
ing competitive reconstruction accuracy. Furthermore, we
demonstrate examples of applications in animation produc-
tion and clothing transfer to showcase the wide-ranging ap-
plicability of the decoupled representation. In summary, the
contributions of this paper include the following aspects:
• A hybrid reconstruction method combining explicit and
implicit representations is proposed, which is capable of
reconstructing high-quality, decoupled clothing and hu-
man body from monocular video.
• For the clothed human body in visible areas, we introduce
a novel representation, hmSDF, which can accurately seg-
ment 3D clothing and body through easily obtainable 2D
human parsing, without any 3D clothing priors.
• The reconstructed decoupled clothing and human body
can be easily applied to animation production and cloth-
ing transfer applications, offering realistic and detailed
geometric quality.
2. Related Work
Decoupled Representation of Clothed Human Body.
Most methods reconstruct the clothed human body geom-
etry as a whole, including representations like mesh [2, 3],
point clouds [36, 57], SDF [6, 20, 39], and occupancy [48,
49]. These reconstruction methods maintain good detail in
visible areas but are inconvenient for applications like an-
imation and clothing transfer. A more effective approach
is to independently represent clothing and the body, model-
ing them as decoupled, layered representations. GALA [27]
and ClothCap [44] utilize 3D segmentation to obtain sep-
arate clothing and body meshes from 3D and 4D scans,
respectively, a method constrained by the high cost of ac-
quiring scan data. Neural-ABC [5] constructs a decoupled
human body and clothing parametric model based on UDF
(unsigned distance function) representation, but its recon-
struction of details is limited. SCARF [9] reconstructs a
mixed representation of a clothed human body from video
sequences, but the NeRF [37] representation of clothing is
limited in geometric effect. Some other methods focus on
reconstructing clothing [7, 8, 19, 47, 58], which allows de-
coupling by using SMPL [34] as the underlying body; how-
ever, the body often lacks detail in these approaches.
Reconstruction from a Single-View Image.
Tradi-
tional methods reconstruct by fitting a parametric human
body model to a single-view image through optimization or
regression within a parametric space [24, 29, 30]. The ef-
fectiveness of the fit largely depends on the representational
capacity of the parametric model. Models like SMPL [34]
and SCAPE [4] can reconstruct the underlying body without
clothes. Some approaches [7, 8, 19] can reconstruct cloth-
ing and use the SMPL model to represent the underlying
body, achieving a complete reconstruction of the clothed
human body. There are also models that simultaneously
represent both clothing and the underlying body, includ-
ing methods that model both uniformly [6, 39] and hierar-
chically [5]. Parametric-based reconstruction methods can
easily produce plausible clothed human figures but gener-


ally lack detail. Methods that target single images can re-
construct videos frame by frame; however, they often fail
to ensure inter-frame consistency, such as lacking frame-to-
frame coherence, or may lead to unsmooth results.
Reconstruction from Monocular Video. 3D clothed
human body reconstruction from video inputs typically re-
lies on motion and deformation cues to recover deformable
3D surfaces.
Early works acquired actor-specific rigged
templates [15, 16, 56] or used a parametric model as a
prior [2].
Many efforts [9, 22, 41–43, 54], based on
NeRF [37] and 3DGS [25], reconstruct animatable human
avatars from dynamic videos, primarily focusing on render-
ing effects, but the quality of geometric reconstruction is not
ideal.
[14, 20, 53] reconstructed high-quality clothed hu-
man body geometries, but the clothing and underlying body
are not separable. DGarment [28] and REC-MV [45] recon-
structed dynamic clothing, excluding the body. Our method
can reconstruct decoupled clothing and the underlying body
while ensuring geometric quality.
3. Method
Given a monocular video containing N frames, which de-
picts a person in motion wearing clothing, as {It | t =
1, . . . , N}. D3-Human aims to reconstruct high-fidelity, de-
coupled, and spatio-temporally continuous clothing and un-
derlying body meshes {Gt | t = 1, . . . , N} without us-
ing 3D clothing template priors. With the goal of achiev-
ing maximum realism, the observed areas captured by the
video, such as the exposed head and clothing, should be re-
constructed with great detail; areas obscured, such as body
parts covered by clothing or self-occluded by the body,
should be reconstructed as plausibly as possible.
To achieve these objectives, We combine the flexibility
of implicit representations with the robustness and rapid
rendering capabilities of explicit representations to achieve
the best results. Notably, the surface of a watertight clothed
human can be segmented into clothing and body parts by
closed curves. Therefore, we first utilize image and human
parsing segmentation sequence information to reconstruct
the separated clothing and body meshes in the visible areas.
Then, with the help of SMPL [34], we complete the invis-
ible body areas and generate decoupled clothing and body
templates. Finally, normal information is additionally used
to jointly optimize the clothing and body to enhance details.
Figure 2 illustrates the overall pipeline of our approach.
3.1. HmSDF Representation
In this section, we define the clothing template Gc and the
body template Gb in canonical space. Considering that the
body parts obscured by clothing are invisible in the video,
we further divide the clothing and body into the visible body
Sb, the invisible body Ub, and the visible clothing Sc. The
visible body Sb is obtained via segmentation after recon-
structing the whole clothed body, while the invisible body
Mb is completed using the SMPL model. The visible and
invisible bodies are merged to form the body template Gb.
The visible clothing and body are represented by a hy-
brid representations[52] that combines a tetrahedral mesh
grid (VT , T) and a neural implicit signed distance function
sη(x), where x ∈VT and sη(x) is a neural network with
learnable weights η. The surface of Sb ∪Sc can be repre-
sented by Sη = {x ∈R3 | sη(x; η) = 0}. The mesh can be
extracted using methods following GShell [32].
Since the reconstructed watertight clothed human body
Sη = Sb ∪Sc, we define a continuous and differentiable
mapping ν : Sη →R on Sη to characterize whether a point
belongs to Sb or Sc:
ν(x) =





< 0,
∀x ∈Interior(Sb),
= 0,
∀x ∈λ,
> 0,
∀x ∈Interior(Sc),
where λ represents the boundary line between Sb and Sc.
We denote ν as the human manifold signed distance fields,
termed hmSDF. This differs from the definition of mSDF in
GShell, which only considers points located inside the open
surface. In contrast, our approach considers points on both
sides of the hmSDF (the visible clothing and body).
3.2. Region Aggregation.
Ideally, an optimized hmSDF function ν should accurately
segment the visible clothing Sc and body Sb. However, due
to inaccuracies in the human parsing mask of each frame
and inconsistencies between frames, inaccuracies may oc-
cur in the boundary line λ , as illustrated in Figure 3. When
inaccuracies occur in the neighborhood of ν(x) = 0, it
causes the segmented regions S
′
b and S
′
c to contain holes
and creates undesired segmented regions S′′
b and S′′
c . The
small fragments contained in S′′
b and S′′
c are inevitably dis-
connected from other subgraphs.
We obtain the number of connected components for each
category from the input image. Since the vertices of incor-
rectly classified connected components are usually fewer,
the category of each subgraph, S′
b, S′
c, S′′
b , and S′′
c , can be
determined by calculating the number of vertices in each
connected component using the depth-first search method.
The correct Sb and Sc can be obtained by aggregation as
follows:
Sb = merge(S′
b, S′′
c ),
(1)
Sc = merge(S′
c, S′′
b ).
(2)
We demonstrate the process of aggregation of Sb and Sc
in Algorithm 1.
3.3. Deformation Fields
Similar to previous methods [20, 45], we use the SMPL-
based Linear Blend Skinning (LBS) method to model large


Figure 2. Overview of D3-Human. The optimization process is divided into two steps: template generation and detailed deformation. The
object is initialized as a DMTet [52] representation, and is optimized to form a complete clothed human. An optimizable HmSDF function
separates the clothing and body regions, with missing parts filled by SMPL. After generating the disentangled template, we use two MLPs
to model detailed deformations for each frame of the body and clothing meshes separately. Finally, the meshes are transformed to the
observed space using a forward LBS deformation, supervised by images, normal maps, and parsing masks with a differentiable renderer.
Correct Segmentation
Inaccurate Segmentation
Figure 3. Schematic of region aggregation. For the correct seg-
mentation results, Sb and Sc correctly segment the body and the
cloth. For inaccurate segmentation results, S
′′
c should merge with
S
′
b, and S
′′
b should merge with S
′
c.
deformations based on skeletal movements, and employ
non-rigid deformation fields to model subtle deformations.
However, a key difference is that clothing and body fol-
low different motion rules. Therefore, we use two separate
non-rigid deformation fields to model the non-rigid defor-
mations of clothing and body respectively.
Non-rigid Deformation. Due to its limited degrees of
freedom, LBS deformation can only model large deforma-
tions and is unable to represent smaller details, such as the
folds of clothing. Therefore, for detail deformation, we use
Algorithm 1 Region Aggregation Algorithm
Input: The initialization segmentation S0
b and S0
c directly
obtained from λ; The correct number of subgraphs for Sb
and Sc are α1 and α2, respectively.
Calculate all connected subsets Qb of S0
b ;
Calculate all connected subsets Qc of S0
c;
Sort Qb based on the number of vertices;
Sort Qc based on the number of vertices;
Extract S′
b and S′′
b based on α1 from Qb;
Extract S′
c and S′′
c based on α2 from Qc;
Obtain Sb by Equation 1 and filter out duplicate points.
Obtain Sc by Equation 2 and filter out duplicate points.
return Sb and Sc without holes and fragments.
two MLPs to model the non-rigid deformations of clothing
and the human body. D is the MLP for non-rigid deforma-
tions:
xt = D(x, ht, E(x); ϕ),
where x is the point in canonical space, xt is the point after
deformation in frame t, ht is the latent code corresponding
to frame t, and ϕ are the network parameters that need to
be optimized. For clothing and the body, the networks and


parameters are independently separate.
LBS Deformation. Linear Blend Skinning (LBS) defor-
mation models the transformation from canonical space to
observed space based on skeletal deformation. Given the
SMPL shape parameters β and pose parameters θt, the LBS
deformation W can be written as:
G
′(β, θt) = W(D(x), β, θt, W(x)),
where D(x) represents the non-rigid deformation of cloth-
ing and body, and W(x) is the method for computing the
skinning weights of x based on SMPL. We refer to some
clothing simulation methods [11, 51] to calculate the skin-
ning weights. For both clothing and body, we use a shared
skinning deformation model.
3.4. Occlusion-Aware Differentiable Rendering
Differentiable rendering is used to render the geometry in
the observed space to 2D, which allows for the calculation
of loss with 2D supervision. Following some differentiable
rendering methods [17, 32, 38], we utilize a differentiable
rasterization approach to render the mesh. Compared to
volumetric rendering methods, rasterization-based render-
ing enables differentiable rendering for explicit meshes and
offers better time and memory efficiency.
For clothed bodies, occlusion may occur between the
body and clothing, which can lead to occlusion when ren-
dering the visible areas of the clothing from the same view-
point. Therefore, only rendering the clothing mesh to obtain
a clothing mask may produce results inconsistent with the
supervision signals, as illustrated in Figure 4. To solve this
problem, we label the faces of both the clothing and body,
rendering them simultaneously. We then use rasterization
to generate occlusion-aware 2D labels, where the effective
area of the body label is the body mask Mb, and the effec-
tive area of the clothing label is the clothing mask Mc.
Figure 4. Occlusion display of the mask. From left to right: the
color image of the captured clothed human, the complete clothed
body mask obtained from SAM2 [46], the clothing mask obtained
from SAM2, the mask obtained by rendering only the clothing
mesh, and the mask of the effective clothing area after rendering
the complete clothed body mesh.
3.5. Training
3.5.1. Training Strategy
Our method consists of two stages: template generation and
detail deformation optimization. In the template generation
stage, we leverage hmSDF directly learn the clothing tem-
plate from mask supervision, without relying on 3D cloth-
ing priors.
In this stage, deformation is achieved solely
through LBS, and parameters are optimized through RGB
Loss, Mask Loss, Eikonal Loss, Encourage Hole Opening,
and Regularize Holes. In the detail deformation stage, we
introduce an additional Perceptual Normal Loss as a re-
construction term, while regularization is applied through
Collision Penalty and Geometry Regularization to optimize
non-rigid deformation.
3.5.2. Reconstruction Loss
We minimize the difference between the rendered result and
the input image through the following objective:
RGB Loss. The L1 is calculated between the rendered
RGB image and the supervision image. We calculate for all
valid pixels P as following,
Lcolor =
1
|P|
X
p∈P

1b(p) · Lmse(Ib, ˆIb)
+1c(p) · Lmse(Ic, ˆIc)

,
(3)
where 1(p) indicates the category to which the current pixel
point p belongs. When 1b(p) is true, pixel p belongs to the
body; when 1c(p) is true, pixel p belongs to the cloth. Both
1b(p) and 1c(p) can be true simultaneously, or only one
may be true, depending on the mask used for supervision.
Ib is the rendered RGB image of the body, Ic is the rendered
RGB image of the clothing, ˆIb is the ground truth RGB im-
age of the body, and ˆIc is the ground truth RGB image of
the clothing.
Mask Loss. Although irrelevant backgrounds have al-
ready been removed in the RGB image supervision, the in-
dependently added mask loss can further constrain the ac-
curacy of the edges, as,
Lmask =
1
|P|
X
p∈P

1b(p) · Lmse(Mb, ˆ
Mb)
+ 1c(p) · Lmse(Mc, ˆ
Mc)

,
(4)
where ˆ
Mb is the ground truth mask of the body, and ˆ
Mc is
the ground truth mask of the clothing.
Perceptual Normal Loss. We obtain the normals of the
image through Sapiens [26] as ground truth, to leverage the
prior information trained on large-scale human body data.
Rendered normals and supervision normals need to be nor-
malized and aligned to the observation space. We use the


perceptual loss [18, 23] to further enhance the effective-
ness of the rendered normals.
Lper =
X
i
∥ϕi(N) −ϕi( ˆ
N)∥2,
(5)
where N is the rendered normal, and ˆ
N is the ground truth
normal, and ϕi(∗) denotes the activation of the i-th layer in
the MobileNetV2 network [50].
3.5.3. Regularization Term
Eikonal Loss. To ensure a reasonable signed distance field,
we add an Eikonal term [12] to the gradient g of the SDF
value at each tetrahedral vertex when optimizing the SDF:
Leik =
X
u∈VT
(∥gu∥2 −1)2.
(6)
Encourage Hole Opening. With limited viewpoints, it
is necessary to identify the opening positions using only im-
age information. We encourage hmSDF openings by adopt-
ing a regularization term similar with [32] as,
Lhole =
X
u:ν(u)≥0
Lhuber(ν(u)).
(7)
Regularize Holes. To avoid excessively large openings,
we impose constraints on all points that are visible from the
current viewpoint as
Lreg-hole =
X
u:ν(u)=0
Lhuber(ν(u) −ϵ1),
(8)
where ϵ1 is a positive scalar.
Collision Penalty. This ensures that the garment does
not penetrate the underlying body, inspired by [11, 51]. We
implement it as
Lcollision =
X
vertices
kcollision max(ϵ2 −d(x), 0)3.
(9)
In particular, when the distance between the two layers is
too close, rendering can produce computational errors, so
the value of ϵ2 is set to 0.005.
Geometry Regularization. To ensure that the optimiza-
tion is constrained, we encourage generating smooth de-
formed results. Inspired by Worchel et al. [55], we add nor-
mal consistency term Ln consist and Laplacian term Llaplacian.
4. Experiments
We conduct qualitative and quantitative experiments to
demonstrate the effectiveness of D3-Human. For qualita-
tive experiments, we use subjects from PeopleSnapshot [2]
and SelfRecon [20]. For quantitative experiments, we use
the synthetic dataset constructed by SelfRecon.
It pro-
vides accurate ground truth for the meshes. Additionally,
we perform ablation studies on the discussion of UDF and
hmSDF, as well as the effectiveness of the perceptual nor-
mal loss, and demonstrate applications in clothing transfer
and physics-based animation production.
4.1. Quantitative Evaluation.
Since there is no public real dataset available for evaluat-
ing the geometric quality of decoupled clothed human re-
construction from monocular video, we use four synthetic
datasets provided by SelfRecon [20], each containing ge-
ometric ground truth and rendered videos. As these pro-
cessed data are not open source from REC-MV [45], we
manually labeled the split points and used the official tools
to generate the feature lines. We also employ CLO3D [1] to
separate clothing and body from the source data for quan-
titative evaluation. We report the Chamfer Distance (CD)
for clothing, body, and the complete clothed human of each
method’s results. For methods that do not support decou-
pling, we only report the CD for the complete clothed hu-
man. We present the visualization of the quantitative com-
parison in Figure 5 and report the metrics in Table 1. The
results show that our method achieves the best results in the
metrics, provides detailed and accurate visual effects, and is
capable of correctly decoupling the human body and cloth-
ing.
4.2. Qualitative Evaluation.
We compare our method to methods capable of reconstruct-
ing clothed human bodies from image sequences, using sev-
eral sequences from the PeopleSnapshot [2] dataset and one
sequence from SelfRecon [20] to include skirted clothing
categories. For all methods, we extract consecutive frames
from a complete rotation and present the comparison results
for the first frame in Figure 8. The additional sequential
results and discussion are presented in the supplementary
materials.
As we can see, REC-MV [45] can accurately recon-
struct clothing but lacks the level of detail achieved by our
method. Due to the lack of further optimization for the body
in REC-MV, directly using SMPL results in mesh penetra-
tion. BCNet [19] reconstructs clothing that can directly use
SMPL as the underlying body; however, it only supports
reconstruction with consistent clothing categories and lacks
almost all detail. DELTA [10] enhances head details based
on SCARF [9], and allows direct decoupled reconstruction
of clothing and body. However, because it uses a NeRF [37]
representation for clothing, it cannot extract smooth geom-
etry, leading to numerous artifacts in the clothing geometry.
SelfRecon [20] uses the SDF representation to reconstruct
clothed human bodies with correct shapes but lacking de-
tail. GoMAvatar [54] employs a Gaussians-on-Mesh rep-
resentation, resulting in relatively coarse meshes. Neither
method can achieve decoupling of clothing from the body.


Reference Images
Male2
Male1
DELTA
GT
Ours REC-MV w/ SMPL REC-MV BCNet
DELTA
SelfRecon
GoMAvatar
Figure 5. Quantitative comparison of the proposed method with REC-MV [45], BCNet [19], DELTA [10], SelfRecon [20], and GoMA-
vatar [54]. We use purple to visualize clothing that can be decoupled from the body. For REC-MV and BCNet, SMPL [34] was added as
the body to show the complete reconstruction of the clothed human.
Table 1. Quantitative comparison across four synthetic sequences. We report the Chamfer Distance (CD) between the reconstructed
surfaces (cm) and ground truth. For REC-MV, BCNet, DELTA and our method, we report the CD for clothing, body, and the full clothed
human body, respectively. For SelfRecon and GoMavatar, we only report the CD for the full clothed human body. The unit is e−3. We
highlight the best value and the second best value. We show Male1 and Male2 in Figure 5, and Female1 and Female3 in the supplementary
materials.
Method
Female1
Female3
Male1
Male2
Clothing
Body
All
Clothing
Body
All
Clothing
Body
All
Clothing
Body
All
REC-MV [45]
1.416
1.789
1.148
0.930
2.082
1.461
0.614
1.945
0.619
0.693
1.201
0.616
BCNet [19]
1.685
10.252
5.561
4.571
10.112
5.681
2.589
6.236
4.802
2.007
4.109
2.853
DELTA [10]
2.177
0.973
1.388
2.173
0.820
0.915
1.327
1.498
1.702
1.884
1.073
1.132
SelfRecon [20]
-
-
3.420
-
-
2.249
-
-
1.310
-
-
1.454
GoMavatar [54]
-
-
7.319
-
-
5.058
-
-
2.382
-
-
3.163
Ours
1.065
0.966
0.959
1.109
0.742
0.636
0.478
0.321
0.270
0.355
0.325
0.279
Implicit UDF
HmSDF
Figure 6. Ablation study on clothing reconstruction using implicit
UDF [33] with deformation field [21] and hmSDF, applied to the
male-3-casual data from the PeopleSnapshot [2] dataset.
Compared to these methods, our approach successfully de-
couples clothing from the body while maintaining a richer
level of detail.
4.3. Ablation Study.
Implicit UDF or hmSDF? Several articles [5, 8, 32, 33]
have demonstrated results by using the implicit Unsigned
Distance Field (UDF) to represent clothing with undefined
Reference Input
COS
MSE
Perception
Figure 7. Ablation study on normal loss. The reference input in-
cludes normals and images. The top row shows the rendered nor-
mals, and the bottom row shows the rendered meshes.
categories, leveraging dense supervision from meshes or
multi-view images. However, we found that UDF strug-
gles to produce robust results due to the limited supervision
provided by single-view dynamic human reconstruction, as
shown in Figure 6. The UDF reconstruction resulted in nu-
merous small holes, a large hole in the abdominal area, and
failed to create an opening at the cuffs. In contrast, hmSDF
achieved an accurate garment shape.
Although UDF uses a network to model shapes and pos-


Reference Input
Ours
REC-MV w/ SMPL
REC-MV
BCNet
DELTA
SelfRecon
GoMAvatar
Figure 8. Qualitative comparison. Comparison of our method with other methods on real image sequences.
Reconstruction
Animation results
clothing
Figure 9. Decoupled reconstruction applications. Reconstructed
clothing and body can be animated using physical simulation
methods. Additionally, clothing can be easily swapped to create
animations with different outfits.
sesses strong representational capabilities, it still has cer-
tain problems: (1) UDF is non-differentiable at the 0-level
set.
Although several solutions [13, 31, 33] have been
proposed for mesh extraction and multi-view reconstruc-
tion problems, UDF remains sensitive near the 0-level set,
and areas with poor supervision signals may lead to recon-
struction failures. (2) The ability to extract surfaces from
implicit UDF is limited. Surface extraction from implicit
UDF [13] is limited to manifold surfaces [35], and regions
that are non-manifold in the implicit representation may fail
to be extracted. (3) The strong representational capability of
UDF reduces its noise resistance; for instance, the large hole
in the abdominal area is caused by occlusion in the clothing
mask. An example of occlusion is shown in Figure 4.
Perceptual Normal Loss. We attempt to remove the
normal consistency loss and replace it with mean squared
error and angular error. While the normal consistency loss
focuses on feature consistency and can produce perceptu-
ally consistent results, the mean squared error and angu-
lar error focus on pointwise features, which may result in
less smooth results. We show the normal rendering results
in Figure 7. Calculating the cosine or MSE loss between
the rendered normals and the reference normals results in
rough and noisy reconstructions. Using the perceptual nor-
mal loss, on the other hand, produces smoother results that
preserve the features and details of the reference image.
4.4. Applications.
We demonstrate the clothing transfer after decoupled recon-
struction and the application of physics-based animation.
The results are shown in Figure 9.
Clothing Transfer. Since our model is capable of re-


constructing decoupled clothing and human bodies, cloth-
ing transfer can be achieved by separately reconstructing
two clothed human figures and exchanging their garments.
Physics-based Animation. The reconstructed clothing
and body geometry can be used with physics-based simula-
tion methods to create more realistic animations. Compared
to non-decoupled reconstructions [20], which make it diffi-
cult to establish motion between clothing and body, we use
HOOD [11] to create more authentic clothing details.
5. Conclusion
We introduced D3-Human,
a method that could re-
construct decoupled clothing and body directly from a
short monocular video.
By leveraging the robustness
of explicit representations and the flexibility of implicit
representations,
D3-Human ensured the reconstruction
of detailed features while maintaining the plausibility
of body parts obscured by clothing.
To achieve the
separation of 3D clothing from the body, we proposed
a novel representation called hmSDF defined on human
body, which was able to obtain 3D segmentation using
only 2D human parsing, without any 3D clothing priors.
Thanks to this novel approach, we are able to achieve
competitive reconstruction accuracy with much less com-
putation time while ensuring the decoupling of clothing
and body.
The decoupled reconstruction results can be
easily used for detailed animation production and clothing
transfer.
Our D3-Human can create high-quality and
easily editable human geometry using only one camera,
providing a technical foundation for the widespread
adoption of many applications,
such as highly ed-
itable digital avatar creation, holographic communication.
References
[1] Clo3d, 2024. Accessed: 2024-11. 6
[2] Thiemo Alldieck, Marcus Magnor, Weipeng Xu, Christian
Theobalt, and Gerard Pons-Moll. Video based reconstruc-
tion of 3d people models. In IEEE Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2018. 2, 3, 6, 7
[3] Thiemo Alldieck, Gerard Pons-Moll, Christian Theobalt,
and Marcus Magnor. Tex2shape: Detailed full human body
geometry from a single image. International Conference on
Computer Vision, 2019. 2
[4] Dragomir Anguelov, Praveen Srinivasan, Daphne Koller, Se-
bastian Thrun, Jim Rodgers, and James Davis. Scape: shape
completion and animation of people. ACM Transactions on
Graphics (TOG), 24:408–416, 2005. 2
[5] Honghu Chen, Yuxin Yao, and Juyong Zhang. Neural-abc:
Neural parametric models for articulated body with clothes.
IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics,
2024. 2, 7
[6] Xu Chen, Tianjian Jiang, Jie Song, Jinlong Yang, Michael J
Black, Andreas Geiger, and Otmar Hilliges. gdna: Towards
generative detailed neural avatars. In IEEE Conf. on Com-
puter Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2022. 2
[7] Enric Corona, Albert Pumarola, Guillem Aleny`a, Ger-
ard Pons-Moll, and Francesc Moreno-Noguer.
SMPLicit:
Topology-aware generative model for clothed people.
In
CVPR, 2021. 2
[8] Luca De Luigi, Ren Li, Benoit Guillard, Mathieu Salzmann,
and Pascal Fua. DrapeNet: Garment Generation and Self-
Supervised Draping. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Con-
ference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2023.
2, 7
[9] Yao Feng, Jinlong Yang, Marc Pollefeys, Michael J. Black,
and Timo Bolkart.
Capturing and animation of body and
clothing from monocular video. In SIGGRAPH Asia 2022
Conference Papers, 2022. 2, 3, 6
[10] Yao Feng, Weiyang Liu, Timo Bolkart, Jinlong Yang, Marc
Pollefeys, and Michael J. Black.
Learning disentangled
avatars with hybrid 3d representations. arXiv, 2023. 6, 7
[11] Artur Grigorev, Bernhard Thomaszewski, Michael J. Black,
and Otmar Hilliges. HOOD: Hierarchical graphs for gener-
alized modelling of clothing dynamics. 2023. 5, 6, 9
[12] Amos Gropp, Lior Yariv, Niv Haim, Matan Atzmon, and
Yaron Lipman. Implicit geometric regularization for learning
shapes. In Proceedings of Machine Learning and Systems
2020, pages 3569–3579. 2020. 6
[13] Benoit Guillard, Federico Stella, and Pascal Fua. Meshudf:
Fast and differentiable meshing of unsigned distance field
networks.
In European Conference on Computer Vision,
2022. 2, 8
[14] Chen Guo, Tianjian Jiang, Xu Chen, Jie Song, and Otmar
Hilliges. Vid2avatar: 3d avatar reconstruction from videos in
the wild via self-supervised scene decomposition. In Com-
puter Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2023. 2, 3
[15] Marc Habermann, Weipeng Xu, Michael Zollh¨ofer, Gerard
Pons-Moll, and Christian Theobalt. Livecap: Real-time hu-
man performance capture from monocular video. 2019. 2,
3
[16] Marc Habermann, Weipeng Xu, Michael Zollhoefer, Ger-
ard Pons-Moll, and Christian Theobalt. Deepcap: Monoc-
ular human performance capture using weak supervision. In
IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recogni-
tion (CVPR). IEEE, 2020. 2, 3
[17] Jon Hasselgren, Nikolai Hofmann, and Jacob Munkberg.
Shape,
Light,
and Material Decomposition from Im-
ages
using
Monte
Carlo
Rendering
and
Denoising.
arXiv:2206.03380, 2022. 5
[18] Yang Hong, Bo Peng, Haiyao Xiao, Ligang Liu, and Juyong
Zhang. Headnerf: A real-time nerf-based parametric head
model. In IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2022. 6
[19] Boyi Jiang, Juyong Zhang, Yang Hong, Jinhao Luo, Ligang
Liu, and Hujun Bao. Bcnet: Learning body and cloth shape
from a single image. In European Conference on Computer
Vision (ECCV), pages 18–35. Springer, 2020. 2, 6, 7
[20] Boyi Jiang, Yang Hong, Hujun Bao, and Juyong Zhang. Sel-
frecon: Self reconstruction your digital avatar from monocu-
lar video. In IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2022. 2, 3, 6, 7, 9


[21] Tianjian Jiang, Xu Chen, Jie Song, and Otmar Hilliges. In-
stantavatar: Learning avatars from monocular video in 60
seconds. 2023. 7
[22] Wei Jiang, Kwang Moo Yi, Golnoosh Samei, Oncel Tuzel,
and Anurag Ranjan. Neuman: Neural human radiance field
from a single video. In Proceedings of the European confer-
ence on computer vision (ECCV), 2022. 2, 3
[23] Justin Johnson, Alexandre Alahi, and Li Fei-Fei. Percep-
tual losses for real-time style transfer and super-resolution.
In Computer Vision–ECCV 2016: 14th European Confer-
ence, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, October 11-14, 2016,
Proceedings, Part II 14, pages 694–711. Springer, 2016. 6
[24] Angjoo Kanazawa, Michael J Black, David W Jacobs, and
Jitendra Malik. End-to-end recovery of human shape and
pose. In CVPR, pages 7122–7131, 2018. 2
[25] Bernhard Kerbl, Georgios Kopanas, Thomas Leimk¨uhler,
and George Drettakis.
3d gaussian splatting for real-time
radiance field rendering. ACM Transactions on Graphics, 42
(4), 2023. 3
[26] Rawal Khirodkar, Timur Bagautdinov, Julieta Martinez, Su
Zhaoen, Austin James, Peter Selednik, Stuart Anderson, and
Shunsuke Saito. Sapiens: Foundation for human vision mod-
els. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.12569, 2024. 5
[27] Taeksoo Kim, Byungjun Kim, Shunsuke Saito, and Hanbyul
Joo. Gala: Generating animatable layered assets from a sin-
gle scan, 2024. 2
[28] Xiongzheng Li, Jinsong Zhang, Yu-Kun Lai, Jingyu Yang,
and Kun Li. High-quality animatable dynamic garment re-
construction from monocular videos. IEEE Transactions on
Circuits and Systems for Video Technology, 2023. 2, 3
[29] Zhihao Li, Jianzhuang Liu, Zhensong Zhang, Songcen Xu,
and Youliang Yan. Cliff: Carrying location information in
full frames into human pose and shape estimation. In ECCV,
2022. 2
[30] Kevin Lin, Lijuan Wang, and Zicheng Liu. End-to-end hu-
man pose and mesh reconstruction with transformers.
In
CVPR, 2021. 2
[31] Yu-Tao Liu, Li Wang, Jie Yang, Weikai Chen, Xiaoxu Meng,
Bo Yang, and Lin Gao. Neudf: Leaning neural unsigned
distance fields with volume rendering. In Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2023. 2, 8
[32] Zhen Liu, Yao Feng, Yuliang Xiu, Weiyang Liu, Liam Paull,
Michael J. Black, and Bernhard Sch¨olkopf. Ghost on the
shell: An expressive representation of general 3d shapes.
2024. 2, 3, 5, 6, 7
[33] Xiaoxiao Long, Cheng Lin, Lingjie Liu, Yuan Liu, Peng
Wang, Christian Theobalt, Taku Komura, and Wenping
Wang.
Neuraludf: Learning unsigned distance fields for
multi-view reconstruction of surfaces with arbitrary topolo-
gies. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.14173, 2022. 2, 7, 8
[34] Matthew Loper, Naureen Mahmood, Javier Romero, Gerard
Pons-Moll, and Michael J Black. Smpl: A skinned multi-
person linear model. ACM transactions on graphics (TOG),
34(6):1–16, 2015. 2, 3, 7
[35] William E Lorensen and Harvey E Cline. Marching cubes:
A high resolution 3d surface construction algorithm. ACM
siggraph computer graphics, 21(4):163–169, 1987. 8
[36] Qianli Ma, Jinlong Yang, Siyu Tang, and Michael J. Black.
The power of points for modeling humans in clothing. In
IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision
(ICCV), 2021. 2
[37] Ben Mildenhall, Pratul P Srinivasan, Matthew Tancik,
Jonathan T Barron, Ravi Ramamoorthi, and Ren Ng. Nerf:
Representing scenes as neural radiance fields for view syn-
thesis. In ECCV, 2020. 2, 3, 6
[38] Jacob Munkberg, Jon Hasselgren, Tianchang Shen, Jun Gao,
Wenzheng Chen, Alex Evans, Thomas M¨uller, and Sanja Fi-
dler. Extracting Triangular 3D Models, Materials, and Light-
ing From Images. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Confer-
ence on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR),
pages 8280–8290, 2022. 5
[39] Pablo Palafox, Aljaˇz Boˇziˇc, Justus Thies, Matthias Nießner,
and Angela Dai. Npms: Neural parametric models for 3d
deformable shapes. In IEEE/CVF International Conference
on Computer Vision (ICCV), 2021. 2
[40] Jeong Joon Park, Peter Florence, Julian Straub, Richard
Newcombe, and Steven Lovegrove. Deepsdf: Learning con-
tinuous signed distance functions for shape representation.
In IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition (CVPR), pages 165–174, 2019. 2
[41] P Paudel, A Khanal, A Chhatkuli, D Paudel, and J Tandukar.
ihuman: Instant animatable digital humans from monocular
videos. In ECCV, 2024. 2, 3
[42] Bo Peng, Jun Hu, Jingtao Zhou, Xuan Gao, and Juyong
Zhang. Intrinsicngp: Intrinsic coordinate based hash encod-
ing for human nerf. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and
Computer Graphics, 2023. 2
[43] Sida Peng, Yuanqing Zhang, Yinghao Xu, Qianqian Wang,
Qing Shuai, Hujun Bao, and Xiaowei Zhou. Neural body:
Implicit neural representations with structured latent codes
for novel view synthesis of dynamic humans. In Proceed-
ings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition, pages 9054–9063, 2021. 3
[44] Gerard Pons-Moll, Sergi Pujades, Sonny Hu, and Michael
Black. Clothcap: Seamless 4d clothing capture and retarget-
ing. ACM Transactions on Graphics, 36(4), 2017. Two first
authors contributed equally. 2
[45] Lingteng Qiu, Guanying Chen, Jiapeng Zhou, Mutian Xu,
Junle Wang, and Xiaoguang Han. Recmv: Reconstructing
3d dynamic cloth from monocular videos. In CVPR, 2023.
2, 3, 6, 7
[46] Nikhila Ravi, Valentin Gabeur, Yuan-Ting Hu, Ronghang
Hu, Chaitanya Ryali, Tengyu Ma, Haitham Khedr, Roman
R¨adle, Chloe Rolland, Laura Gustafson, Eric Mintun, Junt-
ing Pan, Kalyan Vasudev Alwala, Nicolas Carion, Chao-
Yuan Wu, Ross Girshick, Piotr Doll´ar, and Christoph Feicht-
enhofer. Sam 2: Segment anything in images and videos.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.00714, 2024. 2, 5
[47] Li Ren, Benoit Guillard, and Pascal Fua. Isp: Multi-layered
garment draping with implicit sewing patterns. Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems, 2023. 2
[48] Shunsuke Saito, Zeng Huang, Ryota Natsume, Shigeo Mor-
ishima, Angjoo Kanazawa, and Hao Li. Pifu: Pixel-aligned
implicit function for high-resolution clothed human digitiza-
