Title: Npga: Neural parametric gaussian avatars

NPGA: Neural Parametric Gaussian Avatars
SIMON GIEBENHAIN, Technical University of Munich, Germany
TOBIAS KIRSCHSTEIN, Technical University of Munich, Germany
MARTIN RÜNZ, Synthesia, Germany
LOURDES AGAPITO, University College London, United Kingdom
MATTHIAS NIESSNER, Technical University of Munich, Germany
Fig. 1. NPGA: We utilize the rich expression space of Neural Parametric Head Models to create high-fidelity avatars with fine-grained expression control. Our
avatars consist of a dynamics module and a canonical Gaussian point cloud, which is augmented with per-primitive features that encode valuable semantic
information, as indicated on the left. On the right, we demonstrate a highly detailed cross-reenactment using the inset image as a driving expression.
The creation of high-fidelity, digital versions of human heads is an important
stepping stone in the process of further integrating virtual components
into our everyday lives. Constructing such avatars is a challenging research
problem, due to a high demand for photo-realism and real-time rendering
performance. In this work, we propose Neural Parametric Gaussian Avatars
(NPGA), a data-driven approach to create high-fidelity, controllable avatars
from multi-view video recordings. We build our method around 3D Gaussian
splatting for its highly efficient rendering and to inherit the topological
flexibility of point clouds. In contrast to previous work, we condition our
avatars’ dynamics on the rich expression space of neural parametric head
models (NPHM), instead of mesh-based 3DMMs. To this end, we distill
the backward deformation field of our underlying NPHM into forward
deformations which are compatible with rasterization-based rendering. All
remaining fine-scale, expression-dependent details are learned from the
multi-view videos. For increased representational capacity of our avatars,
we propose per-Gaussian latent features that condition each primitives
dynamic behavior. To regularize this increased dynamic expressivity, we
propose Laplacian terms on the latent features and predicted dynamics. We
evaluate our method on the public NeRSemble dataset, demonstrating that
NPGA significantly outperforms the previous state-of-the-art avatars on the
self-reenactment task by ≈2.6 PSNR. Furthermore, we demonstrate accurate
animation capabilities from real-world monocular videos.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s).
SA Conference Papers ’24, December 3–6, 2024, Tokyo, Japan
© 2024 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 979-8-4007-1131-2/24/12.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3680528.3687689
CCS Concepts: • Computing methodologies →Tracking; Motion cap-
ture.
Additional Key Words and Phrases: Virtual avatars, 3D Gaussian splatting,
Data-driven animation, 3d morphable models
ACM Reference Format:
Simon Giebenhain, Tobias Kirschstein, Martin Rünz, Lourdes Agapito,
and Matthias Nießner. 2024. NPGA: Neural Parametric Gaussian Avatars.
In SIGGRAPH Asia 2024 Conference Papers (SA Conference Papers ’24), De-
cember 3–6, 2024, Tokyo, Japan. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 11 pages. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3680528.3687689
1
INTRODUCTION
Creating photo-realistic 3D avatars is one of the core challenges
in computer graphics and includes a wide range of applications
such as movies, games, AR/VR teleconferencing, and the metaverse.
In particular, there is a strong motivation to reconstruct digital
avatars from real-world captures, such as multi-view recordings,
to obtain a digital copy of a specific real person. The resulting
digital avatars can then be animated and rendered from arbitrary
viewpoints while expecting high visual fidelity; e.g., with respect to
photo-realistic colors and details, preservation of identity, and the
adoption of person-specific mannerisms. At the same time, many
avatar applications demand real-time rendering capabilities without
compromising visual quality.
Project Website: https://simongiebenhain.github.io/NPGA/
1
arXiv:2405.19331v2  [cs.CV]  13 Sep 2024


SA Conference Papers ’24, December 3–6, 2024, Tokyo, Japan
Simon Giebenhain, Tobias Kirschstein, Martin Rünz, Lourdes Agapito, and Matthias Nießner
Recent advances at the intersection of computer graphics and
vision research have steadily improved methods to digitally re-
construct 3D objects with photo-realistic rendering quality [Kerbl
et al. 2023a; Mildenhall et al. 2021; Müller et al. 2022]. In partic-
ular, 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) [Kerbl et al. 2023a] has been
quickly adopted in recent work on digital humans, e.g. [Li et al. 2024;
Zielonka et al. 2023] and virtual head avatars, e.g., [Qian et al. 2023;
Xu et al. 2024], due to its efficient rendering and photo-realistic re-
constructions. At the same time recent publicly available multi-view
datasets [Işık et al. 2023; Kirschstein et al. 2023b; Pan et al. 2024; Wuu
et al. 2022], offer an ever more exciting basis for avatar research. A
central question is how controllability can be achieved. The most
prominent approach for heads is to utilize a 3D morphable model
(3DMM), which offers compact descriptions of faces using disentan-
gled parametric spaces for identity and facial expressions. When
utilizing the expressions of an underlying 3DMM, e.g., [Gafni et al.
2021; Grassal et al. 2022; Qian et al. 2023; Xu et al. 2024; Zielonka
et al. 2022], the avatar is optimized to follow a generalized expres-
sion space which enables expression transfer or animation through
tracking in monocular videos [Thies et al. 2016]. While 3DMMs offer
a compact parameterization, their linear nature inherently limits the
fidelity of represented expressions. At the same time, we argue that
the underlying expression space plays a crucial role in determining
the quality of the created avatars. It not only influences the con-
trollability of the resulting avatars but it also limits the sharpness
of details. If the stream of input expression codes is insufficiently
correlated with the observed images, the optimization problem can
become fundamentally ill-posed and lead to overfitting.
To this end, we propose NPGA, a new avatar representation that
leverages a learned deformation representation while ensuring that
the predicted facial dynamics stay close to the prior of an underly-
ing neural parametric head model (NPHM) [Giebenhain et al. 2023,
2024]. NPHM provides our avatars with more fine-grained expres-
sion control compared to classical, public 3DMMs [Li et al. 2017;
Paysan et al. 2009], which were previously used for avatar creation.
In another line of work Cao et al. [2022] explore a learned neural
prior over faces, that helps to map baked uv-space information from
a monocular video into a volumetric avatar representation.
NPGA consists of a canonical Gaussian point cloud, that can be
forward-deformed using an expression code and rendered using
3DGS, similar to previous work [Qian et al. 2023; Xu et al. 2024;
Zielonka et al. 2023]. As a rasterization-based approach, 3DGS can-
not be efficiently combined with the backward deformation field of
MonoNPHM. Therefore, we propose a distillation strategy to invert
the deformation direction of MonoNPHM’s expression prior using
a cycle consistency loss, similar to SCANimate [Saito et al. 2021].
The resulting forward deformation field becomes compatible with
the rasterization-based rendering of 3DGS. To increase the overall
dynamic expressivity of our avatars, we further propose to augment
our canonical Gaussian with per-Gaussian latent features similar
to GaussianHeadAvatar [Xu et al. 2024] and HeadGAS [Dhamo
et al. 2023]. Compared to these works, we allow these features to
influence the movement of Gaussians instead of only influencing
dynamic changes in appearance. This enables our deformation mod-
ule to operate in a higher dimensional space, that can describe
facial dynamics more effectively. We show that this added expres-
sivity results in higher-fidelity image synthesis, but is required to
be appropriately regularized to achieve artifact-free renderings. To
this end, we formulate Laplacian smoothness terms on the latent
features and predicted dynamics, based on the k-nearest neighbor
graph in canonical space. Furthermore, we modify the adaptive
density control (ADC) strategy of 3DGS for more detailed avatar
reconstructions.
To summarize, our contributions are the following:
• To leverage MonoNPHM’s rich expression prior for fine-
grained animation control and effective optimization, we
utilize a cycle-consistency-based distillation strategy.
• We condition our deformation network on per-Gaussian la-
tent features for increased dynamic capacity, use Laplacian
regularization, and adjust the ADC for a dynamic setting.
• We outperform the previous state-of-the-art by 2.6 PSNR and
0.021 SSIM. Furthermore, we demonstrate accurate avatar
re-animation from monocular RGB sequences.
2
RELATED WORK
2.1
Dynamic Scene Representations
Since humans are inherently dynamic, and subject to topological
variation when for example opening and closing the mouth, general
dynamic scene representations aim to solve a set of similar problems
with the exemption of controllability. Implicit approaches based on
Neural Radiance Fields [Mildenhall et al. 2021] provide such flexi-
bility and can be extended to deformable scenes. This extension is
either achieved by modeling temporal changes via a deformation
field that accompanies a canonical frame [Park et al. 2021a,b], by
adding time as a conditioning variable [Li et al. 2022], or directly de-
composing the 4D scene volume into a computationally manageable
representation [Attal et al. 2023; Song et al. 2023]. The extensive
use of MLPs in neural radiance fields entails a high computational
burden, however, and still proves costly after improvements such as
hash encodings [Müller et al. 2022], triplanes [Chan et al. 2022] or
other low-rank approximations [Shao et al. 2023]. MVP [Lombardi
et al. 2021] uses a CNN for amortized decoding of small primitives
that can be compared to the Gaussians in 3DGS [Kerbl et al. 2023a],
but typically at lower sharpness. One approach to extend 3DGS
to dynamic scenes is to optimize parameters like positions over
time [Luiten et al. 2024], resulting in a representation that is hard to
control. This limitation can be overcome by animating a canonical
3DGS representation with a deformation field [Yang et al. 2023],
similar to the Nerfies [Park et al. 2021a] approach. NPGA adopts
this paradigm too.
2.2
3D Morphable Models
Traditional morphable models [Blanz and Vetter 1999; Paysan et al.
2009] learn a representation of body geometry via PCA. They are
one of the primary tools to drive human animation and are heavily
used in industry applications, making them a core building block for
work on virtual avatars. While some models are dedicated to specific
regions like the face [Paysan et al. 2009] and head [Li et al. 2017],
some variants include the neck [Zhang et al. 2023] or even the entire
body [Pavlakos et al. 2019]. More recently, neural equivalents of
2


NPGA: Neural Parametric Gaussian Avatars
SA Conference Papers ’24, December 3–6, 2024, Tokyo, Japan
Rendering
b) Cycle-Consistency Distillation
c) Neural Parametric Gaussian Avatars
a) NPHM Tracking
: per Gaussian features
: Gaussian center
d) Dynamics
CNN
3DGS
CNN
Time
Canonical Space
Canonical Gaussians
Deformed Gaussians
Fig. 2. Method Overview: The basis of our avatar optimization are multi-view video recordings alongside a MonoNPHM tracking thereof, see (a). Next, we
extract a forward-deformation prior F from MonoNPHM’s backward deformation field B using a cycle-consistency loss, see (b). Our avatars consist of a
canonical Gaussian point cloud (c), which is warped into posed space using our dynamics module D, consisting of the coarse pre-trained component F and a
detail network G. We condition both networks on per Gaussian features, which dictate each primitive’s behavior. After rendering the avatar with 3DGS, we
employ a screen-space CNN to suppress small-scale artifacts.
3DMMs, such as i3DMM [Yenamandra et al. 2021], ImFace [Zheng
et al. 2022a] or NPHM [Giebenhain et al. 2023, 2024], have improved
upon the expression fidelity compared to classical PCA-based mod-
els. They encode a canonical representation of the geometry via
a signed distance functions (SDF), which can be mapped to arbi-
trary expressions via a deformation field. NPGA utilizes NPHM as
it offers several beneficial characteristics: It models the face densely
including eyes, hair, and teeth, it captures local details well and it
disentangles shape from expressions.
Instead of replacing mesh-based 3DMMs altogether, several ap-
proaches have been proposed to model details on top of an under-
lying PCA-driven mesh [Cao et al. 2022; Wang et al. 2022; Yang
et al. 2020]. Specifically, Cao et al. [2022] leverage high-frequency
information from tracked UV texture maps to create and animate
avatars, using a high-detailed, learned expression space.
2.3
Human Head Reconstruction and Animation
Existing approaches for animating avatars mainly differ in two fun-
damental aspects: first, the utilized 3D representation in combina-
tion with its rendering mechanism, and second, how the expression
codes are transferred into scene dynamics. Existing work has ex-
plored, among others, meshes in combination with deferred neural
rendering [Grassal et al. 2022; Kim et al. 2018], neural radiance fields
[Gafni et al. 2021; Zhao et al. 2023; Zielonka et al. 2022], and CNNs
in combination with primitive-based volume rendering [Cao et al.
2022; Lombardi et al. 2019, 2021]. Recently, there has been a lot of
interest in point-based representations and rendering [Dhamo et al.
2023; Qian et al. 2023; Xu et al. 2024; Zheng et al. 2023], especially
since Kerbl et al. [2023a] proposed 3D Gaussian Splatting.While
some approaches choose to explain the face’s movement explic-
itly through the underlying mesh of a 3DMM, e.g., [Athar et al.
2022; Qian et al. 2023; Zielonka et al. 2022], others choose the op-
posing extreme of a more data-driven approach by freely learning
the face movement using a neural component, which is directly
conditioned on the expression codes [Gafni et al. 2021; Lombardi
et al. 2021; Xu et al. 2024]. For NPGA we adopt the latter idea but
replace the 3DMM with a neural parametric model, anticipating that
the improved tracking quality translates to higher fidelity avatar
reconstructions and animations.
3
PRELIMINARIES
3.1
3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS)
3DGS uses a point-based scene representation, where each point
represents a Gaussian primitive that is described by a position 𝜇,
rotation q, scale S, opacity 𝛼and spherical harmonics coefficients
SH. In the following, we let the following notation
A = {𝜇, q, S, 𝛼, SH} ,
𝐼= 3dGS  A, 𝜋𝐾,𝐸

(1)
denote the set of attributes A composing the Gaussian point cloud,
and its tile-based differentiable rasterization into an image 𝐼under
the camera projection described by intrinsic and extrinsic parame-
ters 𝐾and 𝐸respectively.
3.2
Neural Parametric Head Models
3DMMs describe the geometry (and appearance) of faces (or heads)
using disentangled parametric spaces for identity and expression
variations. NPHM is a special case of a 3DMM, which represents a
person’s head geometry using a neural SDF and deformation field
3


SA Conference Papers ’24, December 3–6, 2024, Tokyo, Japan
Simon Giebenhain, Tobias Kirschstein, Martin Rünz, Lourdes Agapito, and Matthias Nießner
conditioned on identity latent codes zid and expression codes zexp,
respectively. In particular, our work builds on top of MonoNPHM
formulation, which describes expressions using a neural backward
deformation field
𝑥𝑐= B(𝑥𝑝; zid, zexp)
(2)
that warps points 𝑥𝑝in posed space into canonical space 𝑥𝑐.
4
METHOD
Fig. 2 shows an overview of our proposed representation and method-
ology to build our Neural Parametric Gaussian Avatars (NPGA). As
described in Section 4.1, our avatars are composed of two key compo-
nents: a canonical Gaussian point cloud A𝑐and a dynamics module
D which deforms the Gaussians when provided with an expression
code, similar to recent work [Dhamo et al. 2023; Qian et al. 2023;
Xu et al. 2024]. In Section 4.2 we describe our distillation strategy
that allows NPGA to leverage the rich latent expression space and
detailed motion prior of MonoNPHM [Giebenhain et al. 2024]. Given
multi-view video recordings alongside tracked MonoNPHM expres-
sion codes, we jointly optimize for our canonical Gaussians and
dynamics module, as described in Section 4.3.
4.1
Neural Parametric Gaussian Avatars
4.1.1
Canonical Representation. Compared to the default scene rep-
resentation of 3DGS, outlined in Eq. (1), we augment our canonical
Gaussian point cloud
A𝑐= {𝜇, q, S, 𝛼, SH, } ∪{f}
(3)
with per-Gaussian features f ∈R𝑁×8. While these features are
static themselves, they provide crucial semantic information to de-
scribe the dynamic behavior of the respective primitives. In some
sense, our per-Gaussian features serve a similar purpose as posi-
tional encodings [Mildenhall et al. 2021; Müller et al. 2022], which
are uncorrelated with spatial coordinates, have infinite spatial res-
olution and do not require additional data structures. The idea of
per-Gaussian features has been previously proposed in [Dhamo
et al. 2023; Xu et al. 2024]. Crucially, however, both works do not
utilize these features to better predict the movement of Gaussians,
which we ablate in Section 5.5. [Dhamo et al. 2023] goes beyond
static per-primitive features by dynamically blending them with
expression codes. In the formulation of [Xu et al. 2024] and ours, this
happens implicitly inside the MLP introduced in the next paragraph.
4.1.2
Dynamics Module. We model facial expressions using a dy-
namics model D which is decomposed into two Multi-Layer Per-
ceptrons (MLPs), a coarse prior-based network F and a network
G responsible for modeling all remaining details. Our prior-guided
forward deformation field
𝛿F
𝜇= F (𝜇, f; zexp) ∈R3
(4)
is optimized to act as the inverse of MonoNPHM’s backward defor-
mations B, as we describe later in Section 4.2. F is a coordinate-
based network which predicts offsets 𝛿F𝜇to the Gaussian centers 𝜇
and is conditioned on spatial coordinates 𝜇, features f and expres-
sion code zexp. Note, that F acts independently on each primitive,
which we omit in Eq. (4) and below for clarity.
To represent dynamics beyond NPHM’s prior, such as fine-scaled
expression-dependent wrinkles, and appearance changes, e.g. due
to ambient occlusions and changes in blood flow concentration, we
rely on a second MLP
𝛿G
𝑎= G𝑎(𝜇, f; zexp)
(∀𝑎∈A𝑐),
(5)
which predicts offsets for all canonical Gaussian attributes 𝑎. We use
the same architecture for G as for F , besides having more output
channels due to the increased number of attribute offsets. In total,
given an expression code zexp ∈R100 we obtain the Gaussian point
cloud in posed space A𝑝by adding 𝛿F and 𝛿G to their respective
canonical attributes, which we denote as
A𝑝= D(A𝑐; zexp).
(6)
4.1.3
Screen-Space Refinement. Finally, after rendering the posed
Gaussians A𝑝using the differentiable rasterizer from Kerbl et al.
[2023b], we apply a screen-space CNN network [Xu et al. 2023]:
[ˆ𝐼rgb, 𝐼h] = 3dGS(A𝑝; 𝜋𝐾,𝐸),
ˆ𝐼cnn = CNN([ˆ𝐼rgb, 𝐼h]),
(7)
where the ˆ𝐼rgb denotes rendered RGB colors. 𝐼ℎis a latent image
used for the CNN refinement module, which is obtained by rendering
h + 𝛿G
h , where h are latent CNN features which we additionally
include in A𝑐. We took inspiration from Xu et al. [2024], to include
a screen-space CNN, but note that we decided against performing
super-resolution.
4.2
Cycle-Consistency Distillation
One of our core ideas is to leverage MonoNPHM’s motion prior and
expression space. However, since it utilizes a backward deformation
field B, which warps points into canonical space, we cannot directly
incorporate this deformation prior in our pipeline. Instead, we need
forward deformations, which warp points into posed space, such that
they can be directly rasterized. While it is possible to numerically
approximate the inverse of B using iterative root-finding [Chen et al.
2023, 2021], we search for a more computationally efficient method.
To this end we resort to a cycle consistency loss, similar to [Saito
et al. 2021] and follow-ups [Dhamo et al. 2023; Yang et al. 2022]
which optimize for volumetric skinning weights used for animation
via linear blend skinning.
We propose to directly distill a forward deformation network F
as the inverse of B (see Fig. 2, using a cycle consistency loss
Lcyc(𝑥𝑐) = ∥B (F (𝑥𝑐, f(𝑥𝑐))) −𝑥𝑐∥2
2 .
(8)
Using Eq. (8) we can directly supervise F with the knowledge of
B for arbitrarily sampled points 𝑥𝑐∈R3 in canonical space and
expression codes zexp. Note, that in Eq. (8) we omit the dependence
on expression codes zexp for clarity. During this stage, the canonical
space is not yet discretized into a set of Gaussian primitives. Hence,
we utilize a feature field
f(𝑥𝑐) = TriPlane(𝑥𝑐)
(9)
represented as low-resolution 64x64 triplanes [Chan et al. 2022;
Peng et al. 2020], which can be evaluated at arbitrary points 𝑥𝑐in
canonical space. For convenience, we train F once, using all six
identities from the NeRSemble dataset [Kirschstein et al. 2023b] that
we perform experiments with.
4


NPGA: Neural Parametric Gaussian Avatars
SA Conference Papers ’24, December 3–6, 2024, Tokyo, Japan
During training, each person has their own TriPlane, which we
regularize using a total variation loss. Furthermore, we regularize
the norm of predicted offsets ∥F (𝑥𝑐, f(𝑥𝑐)∥2 to be small. Note that
distilling F separately results in insignificant performance changes.
4.3
Avatar Optimization Strategy
After obtaining a forward deformation field F using our cycle-
consistency distillation strategy, we aim to jointly optimize for the
canonical parameters A𝑐and MLP G to minimize a photometric
energy term. To initialize the canonical Gaussians centers 𝜇we
sample 50.000 points uniformly on the iso-surface of the tracked
MonoNPHM model. The per Gaussian features are initialized by
querying TriPlane(𝜇) at the sampled Gaussian centers. All remain-
ing attributes are initialized using the default 3DGS procedure. In
practice, we observed that keeping F frozen results in sub-optimal
performance, which is likely caused through topological issues dur-
ing distillation in the mouth region. Hence, we decide to further
optimize F alongside G and A𝑐, however, using a significantly
smaller learning rate and a warm-up schedule that encourages the
preservation of the distilled prior.
Our optimization strives to minimize the photometric data term
L = ∥𝐼−ˆ𝐼rgb∥1 + 𝜆

1−SSIM(𝐼, ˆ𝐼rgb)

+ 𝜆

1−SSIM(𝐼, ˆ𝐼cnn)

,
(10)
where 𝐼denotes a randomly sample ground truth image from the
NeRSemble dataset with corresponding expression codes zexp.
4.3.1
Regularization. We find that regularizing both our canonical
representation A𝑐, as well as our dynamics module D is crucial to
avoid overfitting to the training expressions. To regularize NPGA
we utilize a Laplacian smoothness term based on the 𝑘NN graph of
canonical Gaussian centers. To this end let
Rlap(𝑥) =

1
|N𝑖|
©­
«
∑︁
𝑗∈N𝑗
𝑥𝑗ª®
¬
−𝑥𝑖

2
2
©­
«
𝑥∈{f} ∪
Ø
𝑎∈A𝑐
𝛿G
𝑎ª®
¬
,
(11)
denote a Laplacian smoothness term, which we use to regularize
the per Gaussian features f, as well as, the offset predictions 𝛿G
𝑎for
all attributes 𝑎∈A𝑐. Note, that whenever the number of canonical
Gaussians changes due to densification or pruning, we recompute
the 𝑘NN graph.
In addition to these smoothness terms, we encourage F and G
to predict small offsets
R𝛿= 𝜆F
𝜇∥𝛿F
𝜇∥2
2 +
∑︁
𝑎∈A
𝜆G
𝑎∥𝛿G
𝑎−e𝑎∥2
2,
(12)
where e𝑎denotes the neutral element for the group operation act-
ing on attribute 𝑎. Similarly, we impose regularization on the per
Gaussian attributes Rf = ∥f∥2
2 to remain small, and utilize the scale
regularization loss of [Saito et al. 2024], which punishes scales 𝑆
lying outside of a well-behaved range.
4.3.2
Adaptive Density Control (ADC). A central ingredient to the
success of 3DGS is its strategy to adaptively add and prune Gaussians
in areas where they are needed or redundant, based on a set of simple
yet effective heuristics that are periodically invoked. The rules of
ADC have been designed with static scenes in mind and we find
the default settings to be suboptimal for our avatar creation. In the
dynamic scenario, there can be areas that remain hidden for large
parts of the training sequence, such as the mouth interior. Therefore,
we adjust the ADC by employing a generalized mean
𝑀𝑒
𝑖=
 
1
𝑁
∑︁
𝑡∈𝑇
𝜏𝑒
t
!1/𝑒
(13)
to aggregate the view-space gradients 𝜏𝑡of the 𝑖-th primitive of
all frames 𝑇between invocations of the ADC mechanism. Note,
that 𝑒= 1 results in the default 3DGS settings. By increasing the
exponent 𝑒the aggregation 𝑀𝑒
𝑖becomes closer to a maximum func-
tion. Therefore, a few visible frames can be sufficient for the ADC
to trigger densification, which is especially important for regions
like the teeth and mouth interior. We find that 𝑒= 2 already re-
sults in an increased number of Gaussians, leading to more detailed
reconstruction, especially in the mouth interior.
Furthermore, we replace the hard opacity reset mechanism of
3DGS, which we find to be harmful to our optimization, with a
softer variant proposed in [Bulò et al. 2024]. Instead of infrequently
setting the 𝛼values to be almost transparent, the opacities get
reduced frequently for a small amount only, i.e. in our experiments
by 0.01.
4.4
Differences to GaussianHeadAvatar (GHA)
In general our avatar formulation shares large parts with that of
GHA [Xu et al. 2024]. A major difference is our use of MonoNPHM
as underlying 3DMM, which we enabled through our distillation
strategy. Furthermore, we utilize the per-Gaussian features to also
influence the prediction of 𝛿𝜇, we add a Laplacian regularization, do
not rely on screen-space super resolution or perceptual losses, and
modify the ADC strategy instead of resorting to a fixed number of
Gaussians as Xu et al. [2024].
5
RESULTS
For our experiments, we use the state-of-the-art, public multi-view
video NeRSemble dataset [Kirschstein et al. 2023b], from which we
choose a diverse set of six subjects performing challenging facial
expressions. After providing additional details on the performed
experiments and baseline methods in Sections 5.1 and 5.2, we present
our main results on the tasks of self- and cross-reenactment in
Sections 5.3 and 5.4, respectively. Finally, in Section 5.5 we ablate a
series of experiments validating our proposed model components.
We highly encourage the reader to consult our supplemental video
for complete results including temporal information.
5.1
Experimental Setup
The NeRSemble dataset provides 16 synchronized and calibrated
videos, from which we choose 15 cameras for training and the
frontal camera for evaluation. Furthermore, we train our avatars on
all sequences, except for the "FREE"-sequence which we keep as a
held-out evaluation sequence for the self-reenactment task.
5.1.1
Baselines.
GaussianAvatars (GA) [Qian et al. 2023]: GaussianAvatars is a
recent method that creates 3DGS-based avatars, by binding them
5


SA Conference Papers ’24, December 3–6, 2024, Tokyo, Japan
Simon Giebenhain, Tobias Kirschstein, Martin Rünz, Lourdes Agapito, and Matthias Nießner
MVP
GaussianAvatars
GHA
Ours
Ground Truth
Fig. 3. Self-Reenactment: Qualitative comparison of different methods on the held-out sequence.
6


NPGA: Neural Parametric Gaussian Avatars
SA Conference Papers ’24, December 3–6, 2024, Tokyo, Japan
to the FLAME 3DMM model [Li et al. 2017]. Therefore, GaussianA-
vatars can be extremely efficiently animated, since there is no need
to evaluate a costly neural component. On the downside, GaussianA-
vatars are limited to the facial movements lying inside the FLAME
expression space.
GaussianHeadAvatar (GHA) [Xu et al. 2024]: GHA is another
recent 3DGS-based avatar method, which also learns deformation
fields from multi-view video and is controlled through their cus-
tom multi-view BFM [Paysan et al. 2009] tracking. In general, our
approach is similar to GHA. Thus we list the major differences in
Section 4.4. Furthermore, we add a version of GHA which is condi-
tioned on our tracked MonoNPHM expression codes, indicated as
GHANPHM.
Mixture of Volumetric Primitives (MVP) [Lombardi et al. 2021]:
MVP utilizes a combination of volume rendering and a head-geometry
aware CNN that creates a volumetric payload in an amortized fash-
ion. In contrast to our method and the other baselines, MVP utilizes
a Variational Auto-Encoder (VAE) [Kingma and Welling 2014] to
learn a latent expression encoding based on their 3DMM tracking.
Note, however, that we do not provide MVP with view-average
textures to obtain a more comparable evaluation setting.
Table 1. Quantitative Comparison: We compare against our baselines
on self-reenactment using a held-out sequence. For completeness we also
report metrics on the held-out camera of the training sequences, denoted
as novel-view synthesis (NVS).
Method
NVS
Self-Reenactment
PSNR↑
SSIM↑
LPIPS↓
PSNR↑
SSIM↑
LPIPS↓
MVP
33,42
0,957
0,083
27.19
0.919
0.114
GA
32,95
0,956
0,080
27.77
0.926
0.104
GHA
33,92
0,953
0,045
26.81
0.914
0.077
Ours
36,84
0,971
0,034
30.26
0.934
0.055
GHANPHM
33,09
0,952
0,049
26.60
0.911
0.078
OursBFM
34,97
0,962
0,052
28.82
0.924
0.076
5.1.2
Metrics. To evaluate the self-reenactment task we use the
Peak Signal-to-Noise Ratio (PSNR), structural similarity index mea-
sure (SSIM), and perceptual LPIPS [Zhang et al. 2018] metrics. For
the sake of completeness, we also report numbers for a dynamic
novel view synthesis (NVS) scenario, where we compare all meth-
ods on the held-out camera view of the training sequences. We
focus our evaluation on the facial region, since neck and torso are
not accurately explained by NPHM and the underlying 3DMMs of
our baselines. To this end, we leverage segmentation masks from
Facer [Zheng et al. 2022b] to mask out the neck and torso before
computing the metrics. Furthermore, we compute metrics at a resolu-
tion of 550x802. Since we train GHA on 1024x1024 we downsample
and crop the generated images accordingly.
5.2
Implementation Details
Hyper-Parameters. For both our deformation networks F and G
we use 6-layer MLPs with a hidden dimensionality of 256. In order
to preserve the prior that F obtained in our distillation procedure,
we set its learning rate to 4𝑒−5, while G is equipped with a much
higher learning rate of 2𝑒−3. Additionally, we freeze the network
parameters of F for the first 5.000 optimization steps. We decay both
learning rates twice by a factor of 2 during the course of 800.000
optimization steps. Furthermore, we employ weight decay on F
and G, using a weight of 0.1 as an additional regularization measure.
We perform an ADC step every 5.000 iterations, and multiply the
gradient threshold for the densification by a factor of 2, to accom-
modate for the fact that our loss combines the losses of the RGB
rendering and CNN-refined predictions.
Runtime. While we do not focus on efficient training, animation,
or rendering of avatars, we acknowledge the importance of fast
animation and rendering. In our unoptimized implementation, we
can render images at 31 frames per second (FPS) for 550x802 and
18 FPS at 1100x1604 on an NVIDIA RTX3080 graphics card, which
includes deformation, rendering, and CNN. When omitting the CNN
the speed increases to 43 and 38 FPS, respectively. As a comparison,
GHA runs at 22 FPS at 1024x1024 on the same machine. Fig. 8
indicates the number of Gaussians during training, which we limit
to a maximum of 250k. We train all our avatars, and baselines, until
convergence, which roughly takes 7 hours for GA (on an RTX2080),
30 hours (on an RTX3090) for GHA and our method, and 60 hours
(on an RTX2080) for MVP.
Data Preparation. We obtain MonoNPHM trackings on the NeRSem-
ble dataset using a purely geometric constraint between the MonoN-
PHM’s predicted surface and a point cloud reconstructed using
COLMAP [Schönberger and Frahm 2016]. We utilize the same track-
ing algorithm that has been previously used in [Aneja et al. 2024;
Kirschstein et al. 2023a]. For training and quantitative evaluation,
we use a resolution of 550x802, the same as we use for MVP and GA.
For our qualitative results, we fine-tune our avatars on 1100x1604
resolution for another 5 hours of training time. Furthermore, we
mask out the torso, since it is neither contained in NPHM’s expres-
sion space nor the focus of our work.
5.3
Self-Reenactment
Our main evaluation is concerned with the self-reenactment task.
For this purpose, all avatars are trained on a set of 21 training
sequences alongside their respective tracking results. To evaluate the
avatars, they are animated using the tracked expressions from a held-
out test sequence. We present qualitative and quantitative results
in Fig. 3 and Table 1, respectively, and recommend the reader to
consider the supplemental video for temporal results. Our predicted
self-reenactments portray the unseen expression more accurately
and contain sharper details in relatively static areas like the hair
region.
Importance of the Underlying Tracking. Interestingly, GHANPHM
performs slightly worse than GHA, indicating that MonoNPHM ex-
pression codes alone do not immediately boost performance. Instead,
we hypothesize that without NPHM’s motion prior as initialization,
NPHM’s latent expression distribution might provide a more com-
plicated training signal compared to the linear blendshapes of BFM.
Additionally, we train our avatars, but utilize the BFM tracking from
7


SA Conference Papers ’24, December 3–6, 2024, Tokyo, Japan
Simon Giebenhain, Tobias Kirschstein, Martin Rünz, Lourdes Agapito, and Matthias Nießner
Driving Expression
MVP
GaussianAvatars
GHA
Ours
Fig. 4. Cross-Reenactment: Qualitative comparison of transferring a driving expression from a different identity (left) to an avatar.
GHA, denoted as Ours𝐵𝐹𝑀. Indicating that our overall framework
still slightly outperforms GHA when using the same tracked expres-
sion codes. In Fig. 7 we show that the learned dynamics can still
result in accurate self-reenactments, despite flaws in the tracking
as long as there is sufficient correlation the associated latent codes.
5.4
Cross-Reenactment
Another crucial task is cross-reenactment, where driving expres-
sions from another person are transferred to the avatar. Since a
ground truth for cross-reenactment does not exist, we only re-
port a qualitative comparison, which is presented in Fig. 4. We
observe that all methods successfully disentangle identity and ex-
pression information, allowing for effective cross-reenactment. Our
avatars, however, preserve the most details from the driving ex-
pressions. To demonstrate real-world applicability, Fig. 6 depicts
cross-reenactment animations of our avatars using monocular RGB
videos from a commodity camera under real-world circumstances.
To this end, we utilize the monocular MonoNPHM tracker proposed
by Giebenhain et al. [2024].
5.5
Ablations Study
In order to verify several important components of NPGA, we per-
form ablation experiments using three subjects. Quantitative and
qualitative results of our ablations can be found in Table 2 and Fig. 5,
respectively. First, we run a "vanilla" version of NPGA that serves as
a baseline. This version does not utilize per Gaussian features, the
CNN, Laplacian smoothness terms, and uses 𝑒= 1 in Eq. (13) for the
ADC. This model fails to produce sharp renderings for fine-scale
details, and areas that are complicated due to frequent occlusions
and reflections, like the bottom teeth and eyes.
Per-Gaussian Features. When adding per-Gaussian features to the
vanilla model, denoted as "+p.G.F.", the increased representational
capacity results in sharper reconstructions. At the same time, we
occasionally observe artifacts of "free-floating" primitives, as high-
lighted in the second column of Fig. 5. These artifacts can be largely
removed using our proposed Laplacian smoothness terms. Table 2 in-
dicates that using this regularization significantly shrinks the gener-
alization gap between training (NVS) and testing (self-reenactment)
sequences. Compared to this model, "Ours" also includes a CNN,
8


NPGA: Neural Parametric Gaussian Avatars
SA Conference Papers ’24, December 3–6, 2024, Tokyo, Japan
Vanilla
+ p.G.F
+ Lap. smoothness
Ours
Ours - ADC
Ground Truth
Fig. 5. Ablation Study: Without utilizing per Gaussians features ("Vanilla"), the avatars fail to represent fine expression details and complicated regions
like the eyes and bottom teeth. Adding per Gaussian features (p.G.F.) results in significantly sharper reconstructions but is prone to artifacts under extreme
expressions. Adding our Laplacian regularization ("+Lap. smoothness") and a screen-space CNN ("Ours") finally resolves all artifacts. Furthermore, "Ours-ADC"
demonstrates that the default densification strategy inhibits detailed reconstructions.
Table 2. Ablations: We perform our ablation experiments on a subset of
three subjects. We report Novel-View Synthesis (NVS) for completeness.
Method
NVS
Self-Reenactment
PSNR↑
SSIM↑
LPIPS↓
PSNR↑
SSIM↑
LPIPS↓
Vanilla
35.80
0.965
0.048
30.16
0.927
0.067
+PGF
37.04
0.970
0.037
30.54
0.929
0.059
+Lap.smooth
36.85
0.969
0.038
30.56
0.928
0.059
Ours(+CNN)
37.23
0.972
0.033
30.65
0.933
0.053
Ours-ADC
36.12
0.967
0.045
30,49
0,933
0.070
Ours-𝛿𝜇
36.73
0.968
0.040
30,44
0,931
0.059
which further boosts metrics and visual quality. Additionally, we
ablate the importance of letting per-Gaussian features influence
the predicting of position offsets, since recent work [Dhamo et al.
2023; Xu et al. 2024] does not allow such interactions. In Table 2
"Ours-𝛿𝜇" denotes a version of NPGA that disables such an influence,
indicating the benefits of our formulation.
Adaptive Density Control. Finally, we show the importance of
using an adjusted ADC strategy. Surprisingly, using the default
ADC settings with a densification interval of 5000 steps and an
opacity reset interval of 50.000 steps almost completely diminishes
the improvements of our other contributions. While we do not
claim that using 𝑒= 2 in Eq. (13) is necessary for great performance,
we simply note that finding a setting that lets enough Gaussians
appear is important, especially for fine-scaled wrinkles and teeth.
The progress of the number of Gaussian during the optimization is
illustrated in Fig. 8.
Driving
Expression
Cross-Reenactments
Fig. 6. Real-World Application: We utilize the monocular RGB tracking
from MonoNPHM to animate our high-fidelity avatars, demonstrating the
applicability of our avatars outside of multi-view capture studios.
6
LIMITATIONS AND FUTURE WORK
In our experiments, we show that NPGA can create controllable and
high-fidelity virtual head avatars from multi-view video data. How-
ever, both controllability and reconstruction quality of our avatars
are fundamentally restricted to what the underlying 3DMM can
explain. Therefore, regions like the neck, torso, tongue, and eyeball
rotation, which are not explained by NPHM’s expression codes,
cannot be animated as reliably or might even lead to artifacts due
to overfitting. Possible solutions are extensions of the underlying
3DMM to provide a more complete description of a person’s state,
e.g. the inclusion of the neck [Zhang et al. 2023] or even torso and
complete bodies [Pavlakos et al. 2019].
9


SA Conference Papers ’24, December 3–6, 2024, Tokyo, Japan
Simon Giebenhain, Tobias Kirschstein, Martin Rünz, Lourdes Agapito, and Matthias Nießner
(i) MonoNPHM
(ii) Overlay
(iii) G.T.
(iv) Our Avatar
Fig. 7. Tracking Failure: While our MonoNPHM-based tracking occasion-
ally fails for extreme facial expressions (see normals (i) and overlay (ii)),
NPGA still produces good animations for held-out expressions (see (iv)) due
to the smooth nature of expression latent space.
Fig. 8. Number of Gaussians: We illustrate the growing number of Gaus-
sians for each of our avatars, where PID denotes the personal identifiers in
the Nersemble dataset. We limit the maximum number to 250k.
Furthermore, as a data-driven approach to avatar creation, our
method is limited, to some degree, to the available training data per
person. We believe that recent large-scale multi-view video dataset
of human heads [Kirschstein et al. 2023b; Pan et al. 2024] open up
opportunities to learn a generalized head model, such as [Cao et al.
2022], with much higher fidelity than NPHM and other available
3DMMs, through the use of photometric optimization and efficient
rendering, like 3DGS.
7
ETHICAL CONSIDERATIONS
The creation of photo-realistic avatars has potential for a wide range
of malevolent activities, e.g. privacy violation, identity theft and
spreading of deceptive content through deepfakes. We condemn
any malicious or unauthorized uses of such technology, and em-
phasize the need for reliable detection methods that maintain the
authenticity of media content and advert negative societal impact.
8
CONCLUSION
In this work, we have proposed Neural Parametric Gaussian Avatars
(NPGA), a method for creating accurately controllable and high-
fidelity virtual head avatars. The main focus of our work is the
usage of MonoNPHM’s rich expression space and motion prior. To
this end, we leverage a cycle-consistency strategy to distill a for-
ward deformation field from MonoNPHM, such that it becomes
compatible with 3D Gaussian Splatting. We proposed an effective
regularization strategy and adjust the adaptive density control strat-
egy, both of which are important for ideal avatar quality. We show
that utilizing per-Gaussian features to conditioning the complete
dynamics module helps, compared to limiting the influence to ap-
pearance changes. In our experiments, we significantly outperform
the previous state-of-the-art avatars on self-reenactment. Finally,
we showed the applicability of our avatars beyond a controlled
multi-view set-up by animating them from monocular RGB video
trackings.
Acknowledgements. This work was funded by Synthesia and sup-
ported by the ERC Starting Grant Scan2CAD (804724), the German
Research Foundation (DFG) Research Unit “Learning and Simulation
in Visual Computing”. We would like to thank our research assistant
Mohak Mansharamani, and Angela Dai for the video voice-over.
REFERENCES
Shivangi Aneja, Justus Thies, Angela Dai, and Matthias Nießner. 2024.
Fac-
eTalk: Audio-Driven Motion Diffusion for Neural Parametric Head Models.
arXiv:2312.08459 [cs.CV]
ShahRukh Athar, Zexiang Xu, Kalyan Sunkavalli, Eli Shechtman, and Zhixin Shu. 2022.
RigNeRF: Fully Controllable Neural 3D Portraits. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR). 20364–20373.
Benjamin Attal, Jia-Bin Huang, Christian Richardt, Michael Zollhoefer, Johannes Kopf,
Matthew O’Toole, and Changil Kim. 2023. HyperReel: High-Fidelity 6-DoF Video
with Ray-Conditioned Sampling. In Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition (CVPR).
Volker Blanz and Thomas Vetter. 1999. A morphable model for the synthesis of 3D faces.
In Proceedings of the 26th annual conference on Computer graphics and interactive
techniques. 187–194.
Samuel Rota Bulò, Lorenzo Porzi, and Peter Kontschieder. 2024. Revising Densification
in Gaussian Splatting. arXiv:2404.06109 [cs.CV]
Chen Cao, Tomas Simon, Jin Kyu Kim, Gabe Schwartz, Michael Zollhoefer, Shun-Suke
Saito, Stephen Lombardi, Shih-En Wei, Danielle Belko, Shoou-I Yu, Yaser Sheikh, and
Jason Saragih. 2022. Authentic Volumetric Avatars from a Phone Scan. ACM Trans.
Graph. 41, 4, Article 163 (jul 2022), 19 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3528223.3530143
Eric R. Chan, Connor Z. Lin, Matthew A. Chan, Koki Nagano, Boxiao Pan, Shalini De
Mello, Orazio Gallo, Leonidas Guibas, Jonathan Tremblay, Sameh Khamis, Tero
Karras, and Gordon Wetzstein. 2022. Efficient Geometry-aware 3D Generative
Adversarial Networks. In CVPR.
Xu Chen, Tianjian Jiang, Jie Song, Max Rietmann, Andreas Geiger, Michael J. Black,
and Otmar Hilliges. 2023. Fast-SNARF: A Fast Deformer for Articulated Neural
Fields. Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence (PAMI) (2023).
Xu Chen, Yufeng Zheng, Michael J Black, Otmar Hilliges, and Andreas Geiger. 2021.
SNARF: Differentiable Forward Skinning for Animating Non-Rigid Neural Implicit
Shapes. In International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV).
Helisa Dhamo, Yinyu Nie, Arthur Moreau, Jifei Song, Richard Shaw, Yiren Zhou, and
Eduardo Pérez-Pellitero. 2023. HeadGaS: Real-Time Animatable Head Avatars via
3D Gaussian Splatting. arXiv:2312.02902 [cs.CV] https://arxiv.org/abs/2312.02902
Guy Gafni, Justus Thies, Michael Zollhöfer, and Matthias Nießner. 2021. Dynamic Neural
Radiance Fields for Monocular 4D Facial Avatar Reconstruction. In Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR). 8649–8658.
Simon Giebenhain, Tobias Kirschstein, Markos Georgopoulos, Martin Rünz, Lourdes
Agapito, and Matthias Nießner. 2023. Learning Neural Parametric Head Models. In
Proc. IEEE Conf. on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR).
Simon Giebenhain, Tobias Kirschstein, Markos Georgopoulos, Martin Rünz, Lourdes
Agapito, and Matthias Nießner. 2024. MonoNPHM: Dynamic Head Reconstruc-
tion from Monocular Videos. In Proc. IEEE Conf. on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition (CVPR).
Philip-William Grassal, Malte Prinzler, Titus Leistner, Carsten Rother, Matthias Nießner,
and Justus Thies. 2022. Neural head avatars from monocular RGB videos. In Pro-
ceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition.
18653–18664.
Mustafa Işık, Martin Rünz, Markos Georgopoulos, Taras Khakhulin, Jonathan Starck,
Lourdes Agapito, and Matthias Nießner. 2023. Humanrf: High-fidelity neural radi-
ance fields for humans in motion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.06356 (2023).
Bernhard Kerbl, Georgios Kopanas, Thomas Leimkühler, and George Drettakis. 2023a.
3D Gaussian Splatting for Real-Time Radiance Field Rendering. ACM Transactions on
Graphics 42, 4 (July 2023). https://repo-sam.inria.fr/fungraph/3d-gaussian-splatting/
Bernhard Kerbl, Georgios Kopanas, Thomas Leimkühler, and George Drettakis. 2023b.
3D Gaussian Splatting for Real-Time Radiance Field Rendering. ACM Transactions on
10
