Title: Vid2Avatar-Pro: Authentic Avatar from Videos in the Wild via Universal Prior

Vid2Avatar-Pro: Authentic Avatar from Videos in the Wild via Universal Prior
Chen Guo∗1,2
Junxuan Li∗1
Yash Kant1,3
Yaser Sheikh1
Shunsuke Saito†1
Chen Cao†1
1Codec Avatars Lab, Meta
2ETH Z¨urich
3University of Toronto
Driving Signal
Animations
Vid2Avatar-Pro
In-the-Wild Video
Animatable Avatar
Figure 1. We present Vid2Avatar-Pro, a method to create photorealistic 3D human avatars from monocular in-the-wild videos via pre-trained
universal prior. Our method can faithfully create high-fidelity human avatars from a single video and generate realistic animations.
Abstract
We present Vid2Avatar-Pro, a method to create photore-
alistic and animatable 3D human avatars from monocular
in-the-wild videos. Building a high-quality avatar that sup-
ports animation with diverse poses from a monocular video
is challenging because the observation of pose diversity and
view points is inherently limited. The lack of pose varia-
tions typically leads to poor generalization to novel poses,
and avatars can easily overfit to limited input view points,
producing artifacts and distortions from other views. In
this work, we address these limitations by leveraging a uni-
versal prior model (UPM) learned from a large corpus of
multi-view clothed human performance capture data. We
build our representation on top of expressive 3D Gaussians
with canonical front and back maps shared across identities.
Once the UPM is learned to accurately reproduce the large-
scale multi-view human images, we fine-tune the model with
an in-the-wild video via inverse rendering to obtain a per-
sonalized photorealistic human avatar that can be faithfully
animated to novel human motions and rendered from novel
views. The experiments show that our approach based on the
learned universal prior sets a new state-of-the-art in monoc-
ular avatar reconstruction by substantially outperforming
existing approaches relying only on heuristic regularization
or a shape prior of minimally clothed bodies (e.g., SMPL)
on publicly available datasets.
*Equal contribution
†Equal advisory
1. Introduction
Authentic digital humans are widely used for the synthesis
of novel animations of real persons in games and movies.
They are also expected to be an indispensable component
for virtual communications with immersive display devices
(AR/VR). However, creating such an authentic avatar typ-
ically requires expensive multi-view capture systems [2],
limiting its availability to professional studios. If we can ef-
fortlessly build a high-quality avatar just from an in-the-wild
monocular video, it unlocks myriads of applications not only
for professionals but also for everybody.
Despite its promise, it remains non-trivial to create a high-
quality avatar from in-the-wild videos that can be faithfully
animated with diverse poses and efficiently rendered from
arbitrary views. Monocular videos often do not cover the
entire space of pose and view points required for test-time
animation and rendering. The scarcity of pose variations
leads to poor generalization to novel poses. Specifically, the
avatar may exhibit artifacts and unnatural deformations when
animated using out-of-distribution poses. Moreover, inverse
rendering with limited view coverage is prone to overfitting,
resulting in distortions and artifacts when rendered from
unseen camera views.
Existing approaches [15, 22, 29, 52, 61, 78, 88] aim to
overcome its limitations by incorporating statistical prior
from a minimally-clothed human body model [50, 57] or
geometric prior based on heuristics (e.g., Laplacian regular-
ization [52]). While these priors improve robustness under
this ill-posed problem setting, there remains a clear quality
arXiv:2503.01610v1  [cs.CV]  3 Mar 2025


gap from 3D human avatars reconstructed from high-quality
studio data especially when animated with novel poses.
In this work, we argue that the core problem lies in
the fact that the aforementioned priors are not built for
clothed human avatar modeling. Parametric models such
as SMPL [50] focus on minimally clothed bodies without
appearance. Laplacian regularization uniformly penalizes
deformations regardless of the underlying materials. To ad-
dress this, we introduce Vid2Avatar-Pro, a method to create
photorealistic 3D human avatars from monocular in-the-wild
videos by leveraging universal prior directly learned from
high-quality clothed human performance capture data.
Our universal prior model is based on 3D Gaussians [34]
due to its efficiency and expressiveness in representing
details.
While existing universal models for face and
hands [5, 10, 41] rely on shared UV parameterization, it
is not suitable for clothed humans due to the diverse topolo-
gies of clothing. Inspired by [46], we propose, for the first
time, front and back maps as a universal parametrization
for clothed humans. More specifically, we warp static SDF-
based reconstructions [15, 86] of all subjects to a canonical
space by normalizing both poses and bone lengths, and ob-
tain color and position maps from front and back views with
orthogonal projection. This allows us to maximize the spa-
tial alignment of identity conditioning data across identities
while supporting diverse topologies of clothing. We feed the
front and back maps to a U-Net [5, 41, 64] to predict pose-
dependent Gaussian attributes in a pixel-aligned manner with
the input maps. We train this universal prior model via in-
verse rendering with multi-view performance capture of a
thousand of clothed humans. Once trained, we personalize
the universal prior model to monocular in-the-wild videos.
We first reconstruct the canonical textured template from the
monocular observations using neural SDF [15, 86]. Given
the conditioning data obtained from the canonical textured
template, we inpaint the unseen texture regions using a diffu-
sion model [12] adapted for inpainting. We then fine-tune the
model via inverse rendering and update the network weights
of the prior model to faithfully reconstruct person-specific
details from the monocular observations.
The experiments show that our approach produces photo-
realistic avatars that can be animated beyond training pose
distributions with faithful pose-dependent deformations and
appearance changes (cf. Fig. 1). We also carefully vali-
date our design choices via ablation studies. Furthermore,
we compare our method with state-of-the-art approaches in
novel view/pose synthesis using publicly available datasets,
and demonstrate that Vid2Avatar-Pro outperforms them by a
substantial margin both quantitatively and qualitatively.
In summary, our contributions are:
• A universal prior model of clothed humans directly
learned from a thousand of high-quality dynamic per-
formance capture data.
• The first universal prior model architecture designed to
use spatially normalized front and back identity condi-
tioning data, enabling efficient and scalable training of
multi-identity clothed human avatars.
• A robust personalization pipeline to create photorealis-
tic and animatable clothed human avatars from monoc-
ular in-the-wild videos, achieving new state-of-the-art
performance.
2. Related Work
Avatar Reconstruction from Multi-View Videos.
High-
fidelity 3D avatar reconstruction has required calibrated
multi-view systems [2, 9, 18, 23, 26, 44, 45, 48, 55, 59,
60, 62, 67, 69, 75, 79, 83, 87, 94, 95]. These approaches
utilize neural rendering techniques (e.g., [51, 86]) to learn an
implicit canonical representation of clothed humans. More
recently, researchers retain the human skeletal structure and
substituting implicit neural rendering with 3DGS [34] to
learn person-specific animatable avatars [32, 46, 54, 56,
92, 96]. Our front and back map representation is inspired
by [21, 46, 56], specifically Li et al. [46]. Unlike UV param-
eterization which necessitates manual efforts [56] or only
covers minimally-clothed bodies [21], our front and back
parameterization can be obtained automatically and accom-
modates various topologies of clothed humans. Different
from Li et al. [46], who use front and back position maps as
pose features for single identity modeling, we propose, for
the first time, to extend such parameterization to be univer-
sal across multiple identities. Compared to aforementioned
methods that require a specialized capturing setup, our ap-
proach creates photorealistic and animatable avatars from
just monocular RGB videos via learned universal prior.
Avatar Reconstruction from Monocular Video.
Tradi-
tional mesh-based methods [14, 17, 50, 57, 63, 84] are lim-
ited to a fixed topology and resolution, and cannot repre-
sent fine-grained details like the human faces. Regression-
based methods that learn to regress 3D human shape and
texture from images have demonstrated compelling re-
sults [1, 13, 19, 20, 24, 25, 65, 66, 80–82, 93]. A major lim-
itation of these methods is that the reconstructed avatars can
only be driven using rigid skeleton movement without pose-
dependent deformations, leading to unrealistic animation
results. Fitting articulated implicit neural fields to monoc-
ular videos via inverse neural rendering has been demon-
strated [15, 16, 27–30, 70, 71, 78, 85, 88]. Following this
line of work, emerging methods fit articulated 3D Gaussians
to the monocular videos by either directly optimizing the 3D
Gaussian attributes [40, 43, 68, 74] or training neural net-
works to predict the attributes [21, 22, 37, 42, 49, 52, 61, 77].
GaussianAvatar [21] leverages a UV positional map of
SMPL to generate pose-dependent effects. ExAvatar [52]
combines with SMPL-X to achieve a whole-body avatar with


face and hand control. These methods achieve improved ren-
dering speed and quality. However, the reconstructed avatars
still show blurriness and lack appearance details. Especially,
they tend to generate uncanny animation results for poses
that are out of the training distribution from the short video.
In contrast, our method leverages a high-quality and large-
scale corpus of dynamic human captures to train a universal
prior model, which can be personalized to short video data
and ensure superior generalization ability to novel poses.
Human-Centric Prior Model.
Statistical body mod-
els [31, 50, 57] can hardly model human surface details
such as clothing and facial features. Regression-based meth-
ods [6, 19, 20, 25, 65, 66, 80, 81] train networks to learn
pixel-aligned human features. These models are trained on
small-scale static 3D human scans, thus the reconstructed
humans are often not animatable or can only show rigid and
unrealistic animations. Generalizable human rendering meth-
ods are trained on small-scale multi-view images to synthe-
size human novel views from sparse camera inputs without
supporting human controllability [7, 8, 38, 39, 72, 90, 91].
There are some promising prior models that recover detailed
appearance and generate plausible animations for human
hands [10, 11, 53] and faces [3–5, 41]. In this work, we
propose a universal prior model for photorealistic and ani-
matable clothed humans, learned from thousands of dynamic
human performance captures with diverse identities, garment
styles, view points and poses.
3. Method
We introduce Vid2Avatar-Pro, a method to create photoreal-
istic 3D human avatars from monocular in-the-wild videos.
Our method is illustrated in Fig. 2 and consists of two main
steps: building universal prior model for clothed humans
(Sec. 3.1) and in-the-wild personalization (Sec. 3.2).
3.1. Universal Prior Model for Clothed Humans
Geometry/Texture Representations.
We represent the
geometry and texture of clothed humans as a set of 3D Gaus-
sians defined in a canonical space shared across identities.
Each Gaussian is denoted as:
g = {x, q, s, o, c}.
(1)
The parameters include a position x ∈R3, a unit quater-
nion q ∈R4, a scale factor s ∈R3
+ along three orthog-
onal axis, an opacity value o ∈R+ and a color c ∈R3
+.
The associated covariance matrix can be calculated as Σ =
R diag(s) diag(s)⊤R⊤, where the rotation matrix R can be
easily converted from q.
We deform the canonical 3D Gaussians to the posed space
via forward linear blend skinning (LBS). Given the human
pose θ and shape β (consolidated as Θ), defined analogously
to SMPL-X [57], we compute the forward transformation
matrix T as follows:
T =
nb
X
i=1
wi
cBi,
(2)
where nb denotes the number of bones in the transfor-
mation and Bi are the bone transformation matrices for
joints i ∈{1, ..., nb}, derived from the parameters Θ.
wc = {w1
c, ..., wnb
c } represents the skinning weights which
are queried from a diffused skinning map Sc based on the
canonical SMPL-X vertices [47, 57]. The position xc and co-
variance Σc of canonical Gaussians can then be transformed
to the deformed space accordingly as follows:
xd = Txc, Σd = T1:3ΣcT⊤
1:3.
(3)
Universal Identity Conditioning.
We propose front and
back maps as a universal parameterization for clothed hu-
mans. Such parameterization is obtained by orthogonally
projecting the normalized canonical textured template into
front and back views. Thus, we can obtain the front and back
position maps Pf
c and Pb
c, and texture maps T f
c and T b
c in
canonical space. Pf
c and Pb
c are stored with the 3D positions
of the canonical template. We abbreviate the concatenation
of the canonical front and back position and texture maps
as Pc and Tc. For the sake of simplicity and clarity, we
also adopt such abbreviation for other front and back maps.
We use Tc as the identity conditioning data, enabling the
feasibility of training a universal prior model F in a cross-
identity setting. To accompany this, we define the output of
our universal prior model F as a Gaussian map (front/back)
G(Θ), in which every pixel within the projected template
mask Mc represents a 3D Gaussian with its attributes g.
To obtain our conditioning data, we reconstruct the canon-
ical template with vertices V via SDF-based volume render-
ing and LBS-based inverse mapping [15, 86] from multi-
view images. The reconstruction is based on a single auto-
matically selected keyframe in which the human pose θ has
the highest similarity to our pre-defined canonical human
pose θcano. The texture is then obtained by unwrapping the
RGB colors from the multi-view images onto the canonical
template mesh.
To facilitate better learning of pose-dependent surface
deformations and appearance changes across large-scale hu-
man identities, irrespective of bone lengths or human scales,
we normalize the canonical templates based on an average
human skeleton scale. Specifically, we set the shape param-
eters β = 0 and pose parameters θ = θcano for all subjects
and compute the normalization transformation matrix Tnorm
similar to Eq. (2). We then apply the normalization to the
canonical templates as follows:
vnorm = Tnormv, ∀v ∈V.
(4)


1000 Identities
Universal Human Corpus
5k Frames
200 Views
Identity Data (Normalized)
Pose/Shape 𝚯
a) Universal Prior Model for Clothed Humans (Sec. 3.1)
b) In-the-Wild Personalization (Sec. 3.2)
Forward LBS
Rendered Avatar
Canonical Gaussians
Canonical Template
+
+
+
Canonical Texture 𝒯!
Posed Position Map 𝒫"(𝚯)
Gaussian Map 𝒢(𝚯)
In-the-Wild Video
Loss Function ℒ
+
Loss Function ℒ
Rasterization
View Direction
A 3D Gaussian 
(∆x, q, s, 𝑜, ∆c)
Canonical Template
+
Canonical Texture 𝒯!
Pose/Shape 𝚯Posed Position Map 𝒫"(𝚯)
+
Canonical Gaussians
Forward LBS
Rasterization
Rendered Avatar
View Direction
A 3D Gaussian 
(∆x, q, s, 𝑜, ∆c)
UPM
UPM
Tracking/Template Reconstruction
Identity Data (Normalized)
Texture Inpainting
Gaussian Map 𝒢(𝚯)
Canonical Position Map 𝒫!
Canonical Position Map 𝒫!
Figure 2. Method Overview. a) We employ a large corpus of multi-view dynamic clothed human performances to train a cross-identity
universal prior model (UPM). During training, UPM is conditioned on the normalized identity-specific texture map Tc and takes the posed
position map Pd(Θ) as input to predict Gaussian attributes. We extract the canonical 3D Gaussians and synthesize human rendering for
training pose/shape parameters Θ by applying forward LBS and rasterization. We minimize the loss L over the entire universal human
corpus. b) Given a monocular in-the-wild video of an unseen identity, we track the human pose/shape parameters Θ and reconstruct the
canonical textured template. We further deploy a diffusion-based model tailored for canonical texture inpainting to complete the canonical
texture map. We then fine-tune our pre-trained UPM on the monocular observations via inverse rendering to recover person-specific details.
Given the normalized canonical textured template, we gener-
ate spatially aligned identity conditioning data for all training
subjects by orthogonally projecting the templates into front
and back views, yielding the canonical template masks Mc,
position maps Pc, and texture maps Tc.
Universal Prior Model Training.
Inspired by prior
work [5, 41], we employ a U-Net as the universal model
backbone [64]. In particular, our universal model F takes
the person-specific canonical texture maps Tc as identity
conditioning input. To model pose-dependent effects such
as dynamically changing wrinkles on clothes, we further
concatenate the posed position maps Pd(Θ) as additional
input for each training iteration to predict pose-dependent
Gaussian maps G(Θ). Similar to deforming the canonical
3D Gaussians to the posed space (cf. Eq. (3)), we obtain
the posed position maps Pd(Θ) by applying forward LBS
to the 3D positions stored in each valid pixel of the canoni-
cal position maps Pc, excluding the global orientation and
translation which do not affect the human dynamic details.
Thus, our universal model works as follows:
F(Tc, Pd(Θ)) →G(Θ).
(5)
We extract the Gaussian attributes g for all valid pixels
within Mc from the pose-dependent Gaussian maps G(Θ).
In practice, we opt to predict the position and color offsets
∆x(Θ), ∆c(Θ) relative to the canonical maps instead of
absolute position/color maps. This encourages our model
to focus on learning finer-grained details within a given
model capacity. Thus, we attain canonical 3D Gaussians
with positions x = ˆx + ∆x(Θ) and colors c = ˆc + ∆c(Θ),
where ˆx and ˆc are queried from Pc and Tc.
After applying Eq. (3), we obtain all 3D Gaussians in the
posed space. Following splatting-based rasterization [34],
the pixel color C is obtained by the α-blending of N over-
lapping Gaussians that are depth-ordered in posed space:
C =
N
X
i=1
ciαi
i−1
Y
j=1
 1 −αj
,
(6)
where the transparency α is evaluated using the 2D covari-
ance projected from Σ and multiplied with the per-Gaussian
opacity o. Please refer to [34] for more details.
Training Objectives.
The training objectives for our uni-
versal prior model include L1 and perceptual losses [89]
between the rendered and ground-truth images, along with
an offset regularization loss:
L = L1 + λlpipsLlpips + λoffsetLoffset,
(7)
where λ{·} denote loss weights, and the regularization
loss Loffset penalizes excessively large per-Gaussian offsets
∆x(Θ). We minimize the loss function L across all multi-
view clothed human performance capture data.
3.2. In-the-Wild Personalization
Preprocessing.
Given the monocular in-the-wild video,
we first track the human shape and poses Θ using an off-the-
shelf SMPL-X estimator [73]. We then employ Sapiens [35]
to predict the 2D keypoints which are used to further re-
fine the initial pose/shape estimates by minimizing the 2D
keypoint projection error. These 2D keypoints are served
as point prompts for SAM [33, 36] to acquire the human
masks. Given the pose/shape estimation and segmentation


masks, we employ a method akin to that used for studio data
to reconstruct the 3D canonical textured template. Similarly,
we follow the skeleton-based normalization strategy to at-
tain the spatially aligned identity conditioning data. These
steps serve to mitigate the domain gap in conditioning data
between in-the-wild video sequences and the multi-view
training data of our universal prior model. More details can
be found in the Supp. Mat.
Diffusion-based Texture Inpainting.
Unlike the multi-
view capture data, human performance in in-the-wild videos
exhibits varying levels of visibility, rather than consistent
full-body visibility. Hence, we develop a latent diffusion
model to inpaint the textures of canonical templates.
Instead of inpainting the textured template in 3D, we
formulate this problem as a 2D inpainting task applied to
the unwrapped canonical texture maps. We begin by gen-
erating various visibility masks through rasterization of the
pre-acquired studio canonical templates using randomly po-
sitioned sparse cameras. We then fine-tune a pre-trained
latent diffusion model with a DiT-based [58] architecture
similar to that of [12] using the generated visibility masks
and canonical texture maps derived from the studio data.
Specifically, we train our diffusion model to denoise the
canonical texture maps given partially masked inputs and
their corresponding visibility masks. During inference, we
obtain the visibility mask by rasterizing the template using
the monocular input views and use it to generate a complete
canonical texture map. Note that our diffusion model jointly
operates on the front and back texture maps and can inpaint
missing regions with plausible textures by utilizing context
from both sides. We refer to the Supp. Mat for more details.
Fine-Tuning.
To
create
3D
avatars
with
identity-
preserving details while maintaining the generalization
power to novel human poses, we further fine-tune our uni-
versal prior model on the monocular video observations via
inverse rendering with a small number of iterations. Due to
the potentially inaccurate pose initialization, we fine-tune
all network parameters, and optimize the estimated human
shape and per-frame pose parameters Θ jointly. The loss
function employed during the fine-tuning stage mirrors that
utilized in the universal model training stage (cf. Eq. (7)).
4. Experiments
We first introduce the training corpus and the test datasets.
Then we compare Vid2Avatar-Pro with state-of-the-art ap-
proaches in two tasks: interpolation and extrapolation syn-
thesis. Ablation studies are then conducted to show the
effectiveness of our core components and design choices.
Finally, we demonstrate more animation results of avatars
created from in-the-wild monocular videos qualitatively.
Table 1. Quantitative interpolation synthesis comparisons on
NeuMan dataset. Our method consistently outperforms all base-
lines on all evaluation metrics (cf. Fig. 3).
Method
PSNR ↑
SSIM ↑
LPIPS ↓
HumanNeRF [78]
27.06
0.967
1.92
InstantAvatar [28]
28.47
0.972
2.77
NeuMan [29]
25.48
0.966
2.87
Vid2Avatar [15]
26.87
0.969
2.41
3DGS-Avatar [61]
29.75
0.975
1.75
GaussianAvatar [21]
29.94
0.980
1.24
ExAvatar [52]
31.39
0.981
1.64
Ours
32.71
0.983
1.19
4.1. Training Dataset
We use a multi-view system similar to [2] to capture dynamic
human performance, where we obtain calibrated and syn-
chronized multi-view images at a resolution of 4096×2668
pixels through the use of 200 cameras. Participants are in-
structed to perform casual human motions for an average
of approximately 5,000 frames per person. In total, 1,000
participants are recorded for model training.
4.2. Test Datasets
NeuMan Dataset [29]:
This dataset comprises a collection
of videos captured by a mobile phone, featuring a single
person performing a walking motion. Following previous
works [21, 52], we use bike, citron, jogging, and seattle
sequences for comparisons that exhibit most body regions
and contain minimally blurry images. Since the official
training and testing splits have interwoven frames, we regard
the evaluation on NeuMan dataset as an interpolation view
synthesis task.
MonoPerfCap Dataset [84]:
This dataset contains in-the-
wild videos of people with different garment types and
various daily actions. Compared to NeuMan dataset [29],
MonoPerfCap dataset includes more clothing deformations
and pose diversity. We use the first 80% of each captured
video for training and the remaining 20% frames for testing.
Thus, we define the evaluation on MonoPerfCap dataset as a
more challenging extrapolation view synthesis task.
Evaluation Protocol:
We report PSNR, SSIM [76], and
LPIPS (×100) [89] for all synthesis comparisons. In all
evaluation tables, the top three techniques are highlighted in
red, orange, and yellow, respectively.
4.3. Interpolation Synthesis Comparisons
We conduct interpolation synthesis comparisons on NeuMan
dataset [29]. For methods that jointly model the human
and the background, we only compare the foreground (hu-
man) rendering quality. The quantitative results are partially


GT
Ours
3DGS-Avatar
ExAvatar
NeuMan
Vid2Avatar
Figure 3. Qualitative interpolation synthesis comparisons on NeuMan dataset. Baseline methods tend to render with artifacts (e.g.,
corrupted faces and feet) and less details (e.g., the clothing wrinkles and the clothes zipper). In contrast, our method generates clean and
realistic human renderings while recovering more appearance details (e.g., facial features).
Table 2. Quantitative extrapolation synthesis comparisons on
MonoPerfCap dataset. Our method consistently outperforms all
baselines on all evaluation metrics (cf. Fig. 4).
Method
PSNR ↑
SSIM ↑
LPIPS ↓
Vid2Avatar [15]
28.49
0.976
2.46
ExAvatar [52]
30.29
0.979
2.19
Ours w/o Fine-Tuning
29.24
0.977
2.29
Ours w/o Avg. Scale
31.03
0.979
1.51
Ours
31.97
0.981
1.37
sourced from [21, 52]. Overall, our method outperforms all
baseline methods in the interpolation setting by a substantial
margin on all metrics (cf. Tab. 1). The difference is more
visible in the qualitative comparison shown in Fig. 3, where
baseline methods cannot produce sharp details such as the
wrinkles on the clothing and zippers, and tend to generate
artifacts on the face or feet. In contrast, Vid2Avatar-Pro
recovers more surface details (e.g., clothing wrinkles and
facial features). We attribute this to our expressive universal
prior model that is trained on high-quality data.
4.4. Extrapolation Synthesis Comparisons
We further conduct a more challenging experiment: extrapo-
lation synthesis comparisons on MonoPerfCap dataset [84].
Despite a more challenging setting, Tab. 2 indicates that
our method still outperforms baselines across all metrics.
This disparity becomes more evident in qualitative compar-
isons presented in Fig. 4. ExAvatar [52] struggles to recover
the accurate facial features, and both ExAvatar [52] and
Vid2Avatar [15] produce blurry renderings (cf. the shoes
in the first row of Fig. 4). Thanks to our pre-trained uni-
versal prior model, Vid2Avatar-Pro can generalize better to
Table 3. Number of training IDs. Rendering quality consistently
increases when the prior model is trained on more identities.
Method
PSNR ↑
SSIM ↑
LPIPS ↓
Ours #ID 4
31.28
0.979
1.53
Ours #ID 16
31.28
0.980
1.51
Ours #ID 128
31.34
0.980
1.45
Ours #ID 1000 (Full)
31.97
0.981
1.37
out-of-distribution poses with plausible pose-dependent sur-
face/appearance deformations (cf. the hem in the second row
of Fig. 4). Our method also consistently preserves superior
photorealism compared to the baselines.
4.5. Ablation Studies
Training Data.
A key factor that affects the performance
of our universal prior model is the number of training iden-
tities. We quantitatively analyze the effects by training the
universal prior model with different numbers of training sub-
jects, i.e. np ∈{4, 16, 128, 1000}. The training subjects are
chosen at random. We use MonoPerfCap dataset to evaluate
the extrapolation synthesis performance. The quantitative
results are reported in Tab. 3. We observe that the final
rendering quality consistently improves as the amount of
training data/identities increases.
Conditioning Data Normalization.
To investigate the im-
portance of skeleton-based conditioning data normalization,
we compare our full model to a version without normalizing
using an average scale (w/o Avg. Scale). We demonstrate in
Tab. 2 that skeleton-based normalization helps to improve
the generalization ability of our model to unseen identities
and challenging poses (cf. Fig. 5).


GT
Ours
ExAvatar
Vid2Avatar
Figure 4. Qualitative extrapolation synthesis comparisons on MonoPerfCap dataset. In this more challenging setting, our method
produces more identity-preserving human renderings with finer-grained appearance details, e.g., the facial features and shoes. Powered by
our universal prior model, Vid2Avatar-Pro generates more plausible pose-dependent surface deformations (cf. the hem of the T-shirt).
GT
Ours Full
w/o Avg. Scale
Figure 5. Importance of skeleton-based normalization. Without
skeleton-based conditioning data normalization, the created avatar
tends to produce artifacts when driven with out-of-distribution
poses (e.g., the holes close to the armpit).
Diffusion-based Texture Inpainting.
We introduce a
diffusion-based canonical inpainting module to complete
the missing textures that are not visible in the monocular
in-the-wild videos. As illustrated in Fig. 6, our inpainting
module effectively eliminates artifacts caused by missing ob-
servations and inpaint the 3D avatar with plausible textures.
More examples can be found in the Supp. Mat.
Fine-Tuning.
Due to the inherent domain gap between in-
the-wild videos and studio data, fine-tuning the prior model
based on monocular observations is crucial to recovering
person-specific details. To demonstrate the effectiveness,
we conduct an ablation experiment without fine-tuning on
Reference
Ours Full
w/o Inpainting
Figure 6. Importance of inpainting. Our diffusion-based inpaint-
ing module can effectively complete the textures that are missing
from the monocular observations.
MonoPerfCap dataset (w/o Fine-Tuning). Results in Tab. 2
indicate that without fine-tuning, the final renderings are
blurrier and lack detailed appearance features, as shown in
Fig. 8 (e.g., the T-shirt pattern and the belt).
4.6. Qualitative Results
In Fig. 7, we showcase the animation results of avatars cre-
ated from in-the-wild monocular videos. Vid2Avatar-Pro
can generalize to different identities and garment styles, and
produce highly realistic renderings for novel human poses
and arbitrary view points. More qualitative results animated
by various poses are available in the Supp. Mat.


Figure 7. Visual animation results of avatars created from monocular in-the-wild videos. The created 3D avatars can be animated using
novel human poses and demonstrate highly detailed appearance from arbitrary view points.
GT
Ours Full
w/o Fine-Tuning 
Figure 8. Importance of fine-tuning. Without fine-tuning, the
human avatar cannot preserve the fine-grained human appearance
details such as the T-shirt pattern and the belt.
5. Conclusion
In this work, we present Vid2Avatar-Pro to create photoreal-
istic and animatable 3D avatars from monocular in-the-wild
videos via universal prior. We first propose a universal pa-
rameterization for clothed humans that enables cross-identity
training schema. We then build a photorealistic and animat-
able universal prior model for clothed humans learned from
a thousand of high-quality dynamic performance capture
data. Finally, we construct a robust pipeline that supports
personalization of the universal prior model to monocular
in-the-wild videos and create personalized photorealistic hu-
man avatars that can be faithfully animated to novel human
motions and rendered from novel view points.
Limitations and Future Works: The current training
dataset for our universal prior model lacks diverse facial
expressions and dynamic capture data of human subjects
dressed in loose garments. Therefore, our method currently
does not support animatable faces or loose clothing. Addi-
tionally, our method assumes standard lighting conditions
and may not perform optimally in environments with ex-
treme lighting variations. We refer to Supp. Mat for a more
detailed discussion of limitations and societal impact.


References
[1] Thiemo Alldieck, Mihai Zanfir, and Cristian Sminchisescu.
Photorealistic monocular 3d reconstruction of humans wear-
ing clothing. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2022. 2
[2] Timur Bagautdinov, Chenglei Wu, Tomas Simon, Fabi´an
Prada, Takaaki Shiratori, Shih-En Wei, Weipeng Xu, Yaser
Sheikh, and Jason Saragih. Driving-signal aware full-body
avatars. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG), 40(4):1–17,
2021. 1, 2, 5
[3] Marcel C. Buehler, Gengyan Li, Erroll Wood, Leonhard
Helminger, Xu Chen, Tanmay Shah, Daoye Wang, Stephan
Garbin, Sergio Orts-Escolano, Otmar Hilliges, Dmitry Lagun,
J´er´emy Riviere, Paulo Gotardo, Thabo Beeler, Abhimitra
Meka, and Kripasindhu Sarkar. Cafca: High-quality novel
view synthesis of expressive faces from casual few-shot cap-
tures. In ACM SIGGRAPH Asia 2024 Conference Paper,
2024. 3
[4] Marcel C B¨uhler, Kripasindhu Sarkar, Tanmay Shah,
Gengyan Li, Daoye Wang, Leonhard Helminger, Sergio
Orts-Escolano, Dmitry Lagun, Otmar Hilliges, Thabo Beeler,
et al. Preface: A data-driven volumetric prior for few-shot
ultra high-resolution face synthesis. In Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision,
pages 3402–3413, 2023.
[5] Chen Cao, Tomas Simon, Jin Kyu Kim, Gabe Schwartz,
Michael Zollhoefer, Shun-Suke Saito, Stephen Lombardi,
Shih-En Wei, Danielle Belko, Shoou-I Yu, Yaser Sheikh, and
Jason Saragih. Authentic volumetric avatars from a phone
scan. ACM Trans. Graph., 41(4), 2022. 2, 3, 4
[6] Aggelina Chatziagapi, Grigorios G. Chrysos, and Dimitris
Samaras. Migs: Multi-identity gaussian splatting via tensor
decomposition. In ECCV, 2024. 3
[7] Jianchuan Chen, Wentao Yi, Liqian Ma, Xu Jia, and Huchuan
Lu. Gm-nerf: Learning generalizable model-based neural
radiance fields from multi-view images. In Proceedings of
the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition (CVPR), pages 20648–20658, 2023. 3
[8] Mingfei Chen, Jianfeng Zhang, Xiangyu Xu, Lijuan Liu,
Yujun Cai, Jiashi Feng, and Shuicheng Yan. Geometry-guided
progressive nerf for generalizable and efficient neural human
rendering. In ECCV, 2022. 3
[9] Yushuo Chen, Zerong Zheng, Zhe Li, Chao Xu, and Yebin
Liu. Meshavatar: Learning high-quality triangular human
avatars from multi-view videos. In ECCV, 2024. 2
[10] Zhaoxi Chen, Gyeongsik Moon, Kaiwen Guo, Chen Cao,
Stanislav Pidhorskyi, Tomas Simon, Rohan Joshi, Yuan Dong,
Yichen Xu, Bernardo Pires, He Wen, Lucas Evans, Bo Peng,
Julia Buffalini, Autumn Trimble, Kevyn McPhail, Melissa
Schoeller, Shoou-I Yu, Javier Romero, Michael Zollh¨ofer,
Yaser Sheikh, Ziwei Liu, and Shunsuke Saito. URhand: Uni-
versal relightable hands. In CVPR, 2024. 2, 3
[11] Enric Corona, Tomas Hodan, Minh Vo, Francesc Moreno-
Noguer, Chris Sweeney, Richard Newcombe, and Lingni
Ma. Lisa: Learning implicit shape and appearance of hands.
In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pages 20533–20543,
2022. 3
[12] Patrick Esser, Sumith Kulal, Andreas Blattmann, Rahim En-
tezari, Jonas M¨uller, Harry Saini, Yam Levi, Dominik Lorenz,
Axel Sauer, Frederic Boesel, et al. Scaling rectified flow trans-
formers for high-resolution image synthesis. In Forty-first
International Conference on Machine Learning, 2024. 2, 5
[13] Qiao Feng, Yebin Liu, Yu-Kun Lai, Jingyu Yang, and Kun Li.
Fof: Learning fourier occupancy field for monocular real-time
human reconstruction, 2023. 2
[14] Chen Guo, Xu Chen, Jie Song, and Otmar Hilliges. Human
performance capture from monocular video in the wild. In
2021 International Conference on 3D Vision (3DV), pages
889–898. IEEE, 2021. 2
[15] Chen Guo, Tianjian Jiang, Xu Chen, Jie Song, and Otmar
Hilliges. Vid2avatar: 3d avatar reconstruction from videos
in the wild via self-supervised scene decomposition. In Pro-
ceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2023. 1, 2, 3, 5, 6
[16] Chen Guo, Tianjian Jiang, Manuel Kaufmann, Chengwei
Zheng, Julien Valentin, Jie Song, and Otmar Hilliges. Reloo:
Reconstructing humans dressed in loose garments from
monocular video in the wild. In European conference on
computer vision (ECCV), 2024. 2
[17] Marc Habermann, Weipeng Xu, Michael Zollhoefer, Ger-
ard Pons-Moll, and Christian Theobalt. Deepcap: Monocu-
lar human performance capture using weak supervision. In
IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recogni-
tion (CVPR). IEEE, 2020. 2
[18] Marc Habermann, Lingjie Liu, Weipeng Xu, Michael Zoll-
hoefer, Gerard Pons-Moll, and Christian Theobalt. Real-time
deep dynamic characters. ACM Transactions on Graphics, 40
(4), 2021. 2
[19] Tong He, Yuanlu Xu, Shunsuke Saito, Stefano Soatto, and
Tony Tung. Arch++: Animation-ready clothed human re-
construction revisited. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF In-
ternational Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), pages
11046–11056, 2021. 2, 3
[20] Hsuan-I Ho, Jie Song, and Otmar Hilliges. Sith: Single-view
textured human reconstruction with image-conditioned diffu-
sion. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2024. 2, 3
[21] Liangxiao Hu, Hongwen Zhang, Yuxiang Zhang, Boyao Zhou,
Boning Liu, Shengping Zhang, and Liqiang Nie. Gaussiana-
vatar: Towards realistic human avatar modeling from a single
video via animatable 3d gaussians. In IEEE/CVF Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2024.
2, 5, 6
[22] Shoukang Hu, Tao Hu, and Ziwei Liu. Gauhuman: Articu-
lated gaussian splatting from monocular human videos. In
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vi-
sion and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pages 20418–20431,
2024. 1, 2
[23] Tao Hu, Tao Yu, Zerong Zheng, He Zhang, Yebin Liu, and
Matthias Zwicker. Hvtr: Hybrid volumetric-textural rendering
for human avatars. In 2022 International Conference on 3D
Vision (3DV), 2022. 2


[24] Yangyi Huang, Hongwei Yi, Yuliang Xiu, Tingting Liao, Ji-
axiang Tang, Deng Cai, and Justus Thies. TeCH: Text-guided
Reconstruction of Lifelike Clothed Humans. In International
Conference on 3D Vision (3DV), 2024. 2
[25] Zeng Huang, Yuanlu Xu, Christoph Lassner, Hao Li, and Tony
Tung. Arch: Animatable reconstruction of clothed humans.
In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 3093–3102, 2020. 2, 3
[26] Zhang Jiakai, Liu Xinhang, Ye Xinyi, Zhao Fuqiang, Zhang
Yanshun, Wu Minye, Zhang Yingliang, Xu Lan, and Yu Jingyi.
Editable free-viewpoint video using a layered neural repre-
sentation. In ACM SIGGRAPH, 2021. 2
[27] Boyi Jiang, Yang Hong, Hujun Bao, and Juyong Zhang. Self-
recon: Self reconstruction your digital avatar from monocular
video. In IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2022. 2
[28] Tianjian Jiang, Xu Chen, Jie Song, and Otmar Hilliges. In-
stantavatar: Learning avatars from monocular video in 60
seconds. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2023. 5
[29] Wei Jiang, Kwang Moo Yi, Golnoosh Samei, Oncel Tuzel,
and Anurag Ranjan. Neuman: Neural human radiance field
from a single video. In Proceedings of the European confer-
ence on computer vision (ECCV), 2022. 1, 5
[30] Zeren Jiang, Chen Guo, Manuel Kaufmann, Tianjian Jiang,
Julien Valentin, Otmar Hilliges, and Jie Song.
Multiply:
Reconstruction of multiple people from monocular video in
the wild. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2024. 2
[31] Hanbyul Joo, Tomas Simon, and Yaser Sheikh. Total capture:
A 3d deformation model for tracking faces, hands, and bodies.
In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2018. 3
[32] HyunJun Jung, Nikolas Brasch, Jifei Song, Eduardo Perez-
Pellitero, Yiren Zhou, Zhihao Li, Nassir Navab, and Benjamin
Busam. Deformable 3d gaussian splatting for animatable
human avatars, 2023. 2
[33] Lei Ke, Mingqiao Ye, Martin Danelljan, Yifan Liu, Yu-Wing
Tai, Chi-Keung Tang, and Fisher Yu. Segment anything in
high quality. In NeurIPS, 2023. 4
[34] Bernhard Kerbl, Georgios Kopanas, Thomas Leimk¨uhler, and
George Drettakis. 3d gaussian splatting for real-time radiance
field rendering. ACM Transactions on Graphics, 42(4), 2023.
2, 4
[35] Rawal Khirodkar, Timur Bagautdinov, Julieta Martinez, Su
Zhaoen, Austin James, Peter Selednik, Stuart Anderson, and
Shunsuke Saito. Sapiens: Foundation for human vision mod-
els. In Computer Vision – ECCV 2024, pages 206–228, Cham,
2025. Springer Nature Switzerland. 4
[36] Alexander Kirillov, Eric Mintun, Nikhila Ravi, Hanzi Mao,
Chloe Rolland, Laura Gustafson, Tete Xiao, Spencer White-
head, Alexander C. Berg, Wan-Yen Lo, Piotr Dollar, and Ross
Girshick. Segment anything. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), pages
4015–4026, 2023. 4
[37] Muhammed Kocabas, Jen-Hao Rick Chang, James Gabriel,
Oncel Tuzel, and Anurag Ranjan. HUGS: Human gaussian
splatting. In 2024 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2024. 2
[38] Youngjoong Kwon, Dahun Kim, Duygu Ceylan, and Henry
Fuchs. Neural human performer: Learning generalizable ra-
diance fields for human performance rendering. In Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2021. 3
[39] Youngjoong Kwon, Baole Fang, Yixing Lu, Haoye Dong,
Cheng Zhang, Francisco Vicente Carrasco, Albert Mosella-
Montoro, Jianjin Xu, Shingo Takagi, Daeil Kim, Aayush
Prakash, and Fernando De la Torre. Generalizable human
gaussians for sparse view synthesis. In European Conference
on Computer Vision, 2024. 3
[40] Jiahui Lei, Yufu Wang, Georgios Pavlakos, Lingjie Liu, and
Kostas Daniilidis. Gart: Gaussian articulated template models.
In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pages 19876–19887,
2024. 2
[41] Junxuan Li, Chen Cao, Gabriel Schwartz, Rawal Khirodkar,
Christian Richardt, Tomas Simon, Yaser Sheikh, and Shun-
suke Saito. Uravatar: Universal relightable gaussian codec
avatars. In ACM SIGGRAPH 2024 Conference Papers, 2024.
2, 3, 4
[42] Mingwei Li, Jiachen Tao, Zongxin Yang, and Yi Yang. Hu-
man101: Training 100+fps human gaussians in 100s from 1
view, 2023. 2
[43] Mengtian Li, Shengxiang Yao, Zhifeng Xie, and Keyu Chen.
Gaussianbody: Clothed human reconstruction via 3d gaussian
splatting, 2024. 2
[44] Ruilong Li, Julian Tanke, Minh Vo, Michael Zollhofer, Jur-
gen Gall, Angjoo Kanazawa, and Christoph Lassner. Tava:
Template-free animatable volumetric actors. In European
Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV), 2022. 2
[45] Zhe Li, Zerong Zheng, Yuxiao Liu, Boyao Zhou, and Yebin
Liu. Posevocab: Learning joint-structured pose embeddings
for human avatar modeling. ACM SIGGRAPH Conference
Proceedings, 2023. 2
[46] Zhe Li, Zerong Zheng, Lizhen Wang, and Yebin Liu. Ani-
matable gaussians: Learning pose-dependent gaussian maps
for high-fidelity human avatar modeling. In Proceedings of
the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition (CVPR), 2024. 2
[47] Siyou Lin, Hongwen Zhang, Zerong Zheng, Ruizhi Shao,
and Yebin Liu. Learning implicit templates for point-based
clothed human modeling. In ECCV, 2022. 3
[48] Lingjie Liu, Marc Habermann, Viktor Rudnev, Kripasindhu
Sarkar, Jiatao Gu, and Christian Theobalt.
Neural actor:
Neural free-view synthesis of human actors with pose control.
ACM Trans. Graph.(ACM SIGGRAPH Asia), 2021. 2
[49] Xinqi Liu, Chenming Wu, Jialun Liu, Xing Liu, Jinbo Wu,
Chen Zhao, Haocheng Feng, Errui Ding, and Jingdong Wang.
Gva: Reconstructing vivid 3d gaussian avatars from monocu-
lar videos, 2024. 2
[50] Matthew Loper, Naureen Mahmood, Javier Romero, Gerard
Pons-Moll, and Michael J Black. Smpl: A skinned multi-
person linear model. ACM transactions on graphics (TOG),
34(6):1–16, 2015. 1, 2, 3
[51] Ben Mildenhall, Pratul P Srinivasan, Matthew Tancik,
Jonathan T Barron, Ravi Ramamoorthi, and Ren Ng. Nerf:
