Title: Perm: A Parametric Representation for Multi-Style 3D Hair Modeling

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025
PERM: A PARAMETRIC REPRESENTATION FOR MULTI-
STYLE 3D HAIR MODELING
Chengan He1∗, Xin Sun2, Zhixin Shu2, Fujun Luan2, S¨oren Pirk3,
Jorge Alejandro Amador Herrera4, Dominik L. Michels4, Tuanfeng Y. Wang2,
Meng Zhang5, Holly Rushmeier1, Yi Zhou2
1Yale University
2Adobe Research
3Kiel University
4KAUST
5NJUST
{chengan.he,holly.rushmeier}@yale.edu
{xinsun,zshu,fluan,yangtwan,yizho}@adobe.com
sp@informatik.uni-kiel.de
{jorge.amadorherrera,dominik.michels}@kaust.edu.sa
mengzephyr@njust.edu.cn
ABSTRACT
We present PERM, a learned parametric representation of 3D human hair de-
signed to facilitate various hair-related applications. Unlike previous work that
jointly models the global hair structure and local curl patterns, we propose to
disentangle them using a PCA-based strand representation in the frequency do-
main, thereby allowing more precise editing and output control.
Specifically,
we leverage our strand representation to fit and decompose hair geometry tex-
tures into low- to high-frequency hair structures, termed guide textures and resid-
ual textures, respectively.
These decomposed textures are later parameterized
with different generative models, emulating common stages in the hair groom-
ing process. We conduct extensive experiments to validate the architecture de-
sign of PERM, and finally deploy the trained model as a generic prior to solve
task-agnostic problems, further showcasing its flexibility and superiority in tasks
such as single-view hair reconstruction, hairstyle editing, and hair-conditioned
image generation.
More details can be found on our project page: https:
//cs.yale.edu/homes/che/projects/perm/.
1
INTRODUCTION
3D hair modeling, as a crucial and expensive component in the realm of digital humans for industries
like gaming, animation, VFX, and virtual reality, combines the complex and artistic processes to
model the geometry of individual strands to create specific hairstyles in the 3D environment. With
the recent availability of high-quality 3D hair data (Hu et al., 2015; Shen et al., 2023; Zhou et al.,
2018), machine learning methods have emerged for automatic hairstyle synthesis (Zhou et al., 2023;
Sklyarova et al., 2023b), and 3D hair reconstruction from images (Wu et al., 2022; Zheng et al.,
2023; Takimoto et al., 2024; Kuang et al., 2022; Zhou et al., 2018) and monocular videos (Wu et al.,
2024; Luo et al., 2024; Sklyarova et al., 2023a).
Despite their achievements, these methods often overlook the inherent biscale nature of hair, where
the global structure defines the hair flow, volume and length and the local structure defines the
strand’s curl patterns. Neglecting these biscale variations not only limits the quality of hair gener-
ation and reconstruction (illustrated in the comparisons in Fig. 7 and Fig. 10), but also restricts the
editing capability on different scales. Moreover, most of the models proposed in existing methods
are heavy and task-specific, lacking the generalization capability to different down-stream tasks. In
contrast, the field of human body modeling has well-accepted lightweight parametric models like
SMPL (Loper et al., 2015) and MANO (Romero et al., 2017), which designed disentangled coeffi-
cients for pose and shape and are widely applied as a generic prior in deep learning applications such
as human reconstruction and animation. To address this gap, we propose PERM, a parametric repre-
∗The work was mainly conducted at Adobe Research.
1
arXiv:2407.19451v6  [cs.CV]  19 May 2025


Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025
sentation of 3D human hair that is both lightweight and generic for various hair-related applications.
Parameter Space of ⃗θ
Parameter Space of ⃗β
Guide Strands
Full Hair Models
Wisps
Figure 1: PERM is a learned parametric representation of 3D human hair that is designed with
disentangled parameters ⃗θ and ⃗β to respectively control the global hair structure (represented as
guide strands) and local curl patterns (represented as wisps).
PERM is novelly formulated as M(⃗θ, ⃗β, R), where the output hair is conditioned on the guide
strand parameter ⃗θ for its global structure, the hair styling parameter ⃗β for its curl patterns, and
a pre-defined root set R for the hair density (as illustrated in Fig. 1). To independently control the
global structure and curl pattern, we propose a strand representation based on principal component
analysis (PCA) in the frequency domain, which naturally aligns with the cyclical nature of hair
growth (Hoover et al., 2023). We use around three millions of different strands to train the PCA
model and compare it with several deep neural network-based models. Despite the PCA model’s
simplicity, it demonstrates high effectiveness in forming a compact subspace for strands that pre-
serves geometry details much better than the deep neural network alternatives while demanding
much less computation and memory consumption.
Center Strand
Our Guide Strand
Center Strand
Our Guide Strand
Figure 2: Guide strand of a wisp from PCA.
The learned principal components form an
interpretable space for hair decomposition,
where the initial components capture low-
frequency information, such as the rough di-
rection and length, while the subsequent com-
ponents encode high-frequency details like
curliness. As visualized in Fig. 2, this rep-
resentation allows for the intuitive extraction
of smooth guide strands from the given wisp,
closer to what artists really use when groom-
ing 3D hair in industrial software like Maya
XGen (Autodesk, 2024).
For parameterizing the full hair, we follow previous literature to compute the uv of the scalp, and
map the geometry features of each strand onto a 2D texture based on its root position on the scalp.
With the strand PCA representation, we can fit and store the dominant coefficients into guide textures
for guide strands and higher-order coefficients into residual textures for detailed strand patterns.
These decomposed textures are then used to train a framework composed of multiple generative
models as illustrated in Fig. 4.
After training PERM with 20k different hair styles, we obtain a compact, robust and editable gen-
erative hair model that can function as a generic hair prior for solving task-agnostic problems. We
demonstrate its capability across multiple applications, including single-view hair reconstruction
and hairstyle editing, such as changing a hairstyle from smooth to bouncy while maintaining a simi-
lar haircut. Despite not being trained specifically for any of these tasks, PERM achieves performance
equivalent or superior to state-of-the-art task-specific alternatives in our experiments. Moreover, we
introduce a novel application of using PERM-generated hair for conditional image generation and
editing hairstyles in the 3D latent space. A demo of these applications is provided in Fig. 3.
2


Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025
“wavy and short hair, white sweater”
Input Image
Single-view Recon.
PERM Parameter Editing
Hair-conditioned Image Generation
Figure 3: An application demo of PERM, where we first fit PERM parameters to reconstruct 3D hair
from the input image, then edit the parameters to change its style from straight to wavy, and finally
use the edited hairstyle and certain viewing direction as a condition for image generation with Adobe
Firefly (Adobe, 2024).
2
RELATED WORK
Due to the limited availability of 3D hair data, early hair modeling works (Wang et al., 2009) pri-
marily focused on generating variations from a single hairstyle using methods like PCA. With the
recent release of high-quality 3D hair datasets (Hu et al., 2015; Shen et al., 2023; Zhou et al., 2018),
machine learning methods have emerged to tackle various hair-related tasks. Hair representations
used in these methods are generally categorized into two types: volumetric hair representation and
strand-based hair representation.
Volumetric Hair Representation
Considering the volumetric nature of hair, Saito et al. (2018)
first proposed a volumetric hair representation that converts a 3D hair into a combination of a 3D
occupancy field and an orientation field, where strands could later be generated from discretized
voxels. As an efficient spatially-aware intermediate representation for network training, this rep-
resentation has been widely adopted in subsequent works for a range of hair-related applications,
spanning from sketch-based hair modeling (Shen et al., 2020), video-based dynamic hair model-
ing (Yang et al., 2019; Wang et al., 2023b), to 3D hair reconstruction from images (Zhang & Zheng,
2019; Takimoto et al., 2024; Kuang et al., 2022) or monocular videos (Wu et al., 2024; Sklyarova
et al., 2023a). However, since discrete volumetric fields are not well-suited for representing curly
and kinky hair, another line of research has sought to improve this volumetric representation. These
advancements include implicit volumetric representations (Wu et al., 2022; Zheng et al., 2023) and
hybrid representations that attach multiple neural volumetric primitives to pre-obtained sparse guide
strands (Wang et al., 2022; 2023a).
Strand-based Hair Representation
Since real human hair consists of individual strands, the most
intuitive way to represent it is as a collection of strands, where each strand can be represented as a 3D
polyline with a fixed number of points. Zhou et al. (2018) adopted this strand-based representation
and proposed to organize strand features as a 2D hair texture according to the scalp uv parameter-
ization, which facilitates the training of 2D convolutional networks. This idea has been expanded
by subsequent works, incorporating more advanced networks such as U-Net (Ronneberger et al.,
2015) and diffusion models (Ho et al., 2020) to solve tasks such as neural hair rendering (Rosu
et al., 2022), text-conditioned hair generation (Sklyarova et al., 2023b) and 3D hair capture from
monocular videos (Sklyarova et al., 2023a). While these diffusion-based methods produce impres-
sive results, they typically involve a heavy denoising process and lack a compact latent space for
hair reconstruction and editing. Recent work on 3D Gaussian Splatting (Kerbl et al., 2023) offers a
potential enhancement to this representation, where Gaussian splats can be attached to each segment
of the strand. This hybrid representation enables the joint learning of both hair geometry and ap-
pearance, showing promise in 3D hair capture (Zakharov et al., 2024; Luo et al., 2024; Zhou et al.,
2024). However, all these strand-based works are task-specific and neglect the biscale nature of hair,
thereby limiting the quality and versatility of the generated or reconstructed hairstyles.
Generative Hair Model
GroomGen (Zhou et al., 2023), most related to our work, learns a hair
prior using hierarchical latent spaces. However, their hierarchy is only for the low-resolution hair
texture, which refers to a sparse set of strands, and the high-resolution hair texture, which refers
to the final full hair, is upsampled in a deterministic way. Although they denote the sparse strands
3


Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025
as guide strands, those are just like the center strands as illustrated in Fig. 2 without the filtered
structure. They do not have the disentangled parameters for controlling the overall hair structure
features and the detailed hair curl patterns, which leads to a different architecture design from our
method.
While GroomGen reported promising results in their paper, we found it is both theoretically and
experimentally unreliable through our experiments. Its VAE-based strand representation struggles
to preserve the strand structure and the entire architecture is very unstable to train. We further
found that some curly hairstyles showcased in the paper are unachievable with the described strand
resolution. We include our experiments of GroomGen in Appendix C.4.
PCA for Hair
The biology community has widely adopted PCA to analyze and classify different
hair types in the real world (Hoover et al., 2023; De La Mettrie et al., 2007; Loussouarn et al., 2007).
We transfer these biological insights into the machine learning domain, introducing the first neural
network architecture to incorporate a PCA-based strand representation for human hair. While Wang
et al. (2009) previously explored PCA-based representations for variations of a single hair model,
we aim at generating high variety of hairstyles trained on large-scale dataset. This approach has
proven to be both efficient and highly accurate in preserving strand details, which can be deployed
as a generic hair prior to solve task-agnostic problems.
3
MODEL FORMULATION
StyleGAN2
U-Net Super Resolution
256x256x10
256x256x54
Geometry Texture
Guide Strands
Guide Texture
Baldness Map
Concat.
Residual Texture
Baldness Map
Encode
Modulate
Blend
Upsampled Guide Texture
Reconstructed Residual Texture
256x256x64
32x32x10
Figure 4: Architecture overview.
In PERM, hair is represented as geometry textures T storing the strand PCA coefficients ⃗γ (Sec. 3.1).
These textures are decomposed into a lower-order component, the guide texture, which captures the
global hair structure, and a higher-order component, the residual texture, which encodes local curl
pattern information. To parameterize these textures, a parameter ⃗θ is designed to generate the guide
textures Tguide and Mguide through the function G(⃗θ), covering the sparse set of guide strands and the
hair growing area on the scalp respectively (Sec. 3.2.1). These guide textures are upsampled with
a deterministic function F(·), whose output contains the complete hair structure but lacks high-
frequency details (Sec. 3.2.2). To complement that, another parameter ⃗β is introduced to infer the
residual texture Tres through the function D(⃗β), storing high-frequency information such as different
curl patterns (Sec. 3.2.3). Concatenating the upsampled guide texture and residual texture yields the
geometry texture, which can then be sampled and decoded with the strand function S(⃗γ) formulated
in Sec. 3.1 to produce the final strand geometry. An overview of this architecture is illustrated in
Fig. 4, and the resulting PERM model, denoted as M(⃗θ, ⃗β, R), can then be expressed as:
M(⃗θ, ⃗β, R; Φ) = S

Sample
 R; F(G(⃗θ)) ⊕D(⃗β)

,
(1)
where Sample(·) denotes nearest neighbor interpolation used to sample the synthesized texture with
2D root coordinates in the pre-defined root set R, ⊕represents the concatenation operation along the
feature channels, and Φ specifies the full set of trainable parameters in PERM used to approximate
the functions above. Once trained, parameters in Φ are held fixed, and novel 3D hairstyles are
synthesized by varying ⃗θ and ⃗β respectively, while the hair density can be adjusted by manipulating
the number of roots in R. The dimension of parameters ⃗θ and ⃗β are both set to 512 in our model
(|⃗θ| = |⃗β| = 512). In the following, we delve into the details of each term in our model.
4


Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025
3.1
STRAND REPRESENTATION
For human hair, its cyclical growth behavior has been extensively documented in the biology com-
munity, where PCA has also been employed to analyze different hair types (Hoover et al., 2023;
De La Mettrie et al., 2007; Loussouarn et al., 2007). Inspired by these biological findings, we define
a low-dimensional parameter space based on PCA in the frequency domain. Formally, for 3D hair
strands with a fixed number of points S = {p1, p2, . . . , pL} ∈RL×3 (L = 100 in our experiments),
they are represented as the output of a linear function S(⃗γ) in the frequency domain:
S(⃗γ; X) = iDFT(¯S + ⃗γ⊤X) = iDFT(¯S +
|⃗γ|
X
n=1
⃗γnXn),
(2)
where ⃗γ = [γ1, . . . , γ|⃗γ|]⊤is a vector of strand coefficients, and X = [X1, X2, . . . , X|⃗γ|]⊤∈
R|⃗γ|×6k forms a matrix of orthonormal principal components that capture phase variations in
different strands, with k = ⌊L/2⌋+ 1 referring the number of frequency bands.
The term
¯S = [¯Sreal, ¯Simag] ∈Rk×3×2 represents the mean phase vector of strands, and iDFT(·) denotes
the inverse Discrete Fourier Transform that maps strands back from the frequency domain to the
spatial domain. In other sections, we often omit X in Eq. 2 for notational convenience.
To obtain quantities in Eq. 2, we first apply the Discrete Fourier Transform (DFT) along the x, y, z
axes to all strands in our collected hair models, and then compute the mean phase vector ¯S and solve
the principal components X by performing PCA on the computed Fourier bases, which is similar to
the prevalent PCA-based modeling methods in digital humans (Blanz & Vetter, 1999; Loper et al.,
2015; Li et al., 2017). We set the number of PCA coefficients |⃗γ| = 64, which explained almost
100% of the variance in the training set (see Fig. 12).
Our PCA-based representation also facilitates a meaningful decomposition of strand geometry by
forming an interpretable parameter space. Our analysis in Appendix B.4 reveals that the first 10 PCA
coefficients are enough to effectively capture the global structure of each strand, and the remaining
54 coefficients encode high-frequency details, such as curl patterns (see Fig. 19). Leveraging this
intuitive decomposition, we can effortlessly edit a given hairstyle or transfer the curl patterns from
one hairstyle to another. Examples are provided in Fig. 6.
3.2
FULL HAIR REPRESENTATION
We define a 2D parameterization of hairstyles on the scalp surface as a regular uv texture map, where
each texel stores the strand PCA coefficients ⃗γ formulated in Eq. 2. These textures are referred
to as hair geometry textures, denoted as T ∈R256×256×64. Similar to GroomGen (Zhou et al.,
2023), we separately model the baldness area as a baldness map M ∈R256×256. Both T and M
are downsampled to 32 × 32 to represent guide strands (denoted as the guide texture Tguide and
mask Mguide), where only the low-rank PCA coefficients (|⃗γguide| = 10) are kept in Tguide. As
not all texels will be decoded to meaningful strands, Tguide typically accommodates around 400
strands, as visualized in Fig. 1. Note that the concept of guide strands here is different from previous
works (Zhou et al., 2023; Shen et al., 2023), where the guide strands are just quantitatively down-
sampled strands as visualized in Fig. 2 without the filtered structure.
Since guide strands only serve as a sparse representation of the full hair, an upsampling process is
necessary to obtain the final hair strands. However, as illustrated in GroomGen, this process en-
tails a one-to-many mapping (Zhou et al., 2023), wherein the same guide strands can be upsampled
to yield diverse hairstyles with varying strand randomness and curliness. Achieving this property
proves challenging, necessitating an orthogonal decomposition of the global hair structure and local
curl patterns. Previous methods thus either downgraded to a deterministic one-to-one mapping (Skl-
yarova et al., 2023b) or resorted to a manual post-processing step (Zhou et al., 2023). To address
this challenge, we further decompose our hair geometry texture T into Tlow ∈R256×256×10 and
Tres ∈R256×256×54 by splitting along the feature channels. Given the explainability of our strand
PCA coefficients, we discern that Tlow encapsulates the global hair structure, while Tres embodies
the local curl patterns, denoted as the residual texture.
Leveraging this decomposition, we employ different neural networks to parameterize them, simu-
lating the automated process of hair modeling pipeline.
5


Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025
3.2.1
GUIDE TEXTURE SYNTHESIS
Formally, for guide textures, we train a neural network to approximate the function, G(⃗θ; ϕ1):
R|⃗θ| 7→R32×32×(10+1), which synthesizes Tguide and Mguide from the guide strand parameter ⃗θ,
where ϕ1 denotes the trainable network parameters. In our formulation, we choose StyleGAN2 (Kar-
ras et al., 2020) as the backbone of our model, which has been proved to be a powerful generator
in both 2D images and 3D feature tri-planes (Chan et al., 2022). It also ensures our guide strand
parameter will follow the normal distribution ⃗θ ∼N(0, I), making it easy to sample. Moreover,
the intermediate W and W+ spaces introduced in StyleGAN allow for more faithful latent embed-
ding (Abdal et al., 2019), which in our case facilitates hair reconstruction either from 3D strands
or 2D orientation images. Since our generator synthesizes both the guide texture Tguide and mask
Mguide, we use a similar dual discrimination method as EG3D (Chan et al., 2022), where we con-
catenate these two images and feed them into the discriminator. This operation ensures consistency
between the generated texture and mask, which helps the generator to place zero-length strands in
bald areas. Our training objective is identical to StyleGAN2, which consists of a non-saturating
GAN loss (Goodfellow et al., 2014) with R1 regularization (Mescheder et al., 2018) on both the
texture and mask, where the regularization strengths are set to 5 and 1, respectively.
3.2.2
GUIDE TEXTURE UPSAMPLING
To upsample the synthesized guide textures, we formulate it as an image super resolution problem,
which can be defined as the function, F(Tguide, Mguide; ϕ2) : R32×32×11 7→R256×256×10, with
trainable network parameters ϕ2. Note that this function operates as a deterministic mapping with-
out parameter control, which aligns with both previous deep learning-based methods (Zhou et al.,
2023; Sklyarova et al., 2023b) and the adaptive interpolation algorithm used in current hair model-
ing software. To approximate F(·), we train a U-Net (Ronneberger et al., 2015) on the bilinearly
upsampled textures, which translates them to 14-channel weight maps, where the first 4 channels
represent the weight vector ⃗ω for the 4 neighboring guide strands, and the last 10 channels represent
a residual vector ⃗δ to correct the blended coefficients. Therefore, the final coefficient ⃗γlow can be
calculated as:
⃗γlow = ⃗ω⊤γguide + ⃗δ =
4
X
n=1
ωn⃗γn
guide + ⃗δ.
(3)
Our experiments demonstrate that this weight-based blending output allows the network to converge
to a sharper result compared to predicting coefficients directly.
We train the U-Net in a supervised manner, where we employ both an L1 loss for the blended
texture ˆTlow and a geometric loss Lgeo for the decoded strand geometry. Specifically, the geometric
loss Lgeo encompasses an L1 loss for the point position ˆpn, a cosine distance for the orientation
ˆdn = ˆpn+1 −ˆpn (Rosu et al., 2022), and an L1 loss for the curvature, represented as the L2 norm
of binormal vector ˆbn = ∥ˆdn × ˆdn+1∥2 (Sklyarova et al., 2023a):
Lgeo =
L
X
n=1
∥ˆpn −pn∥1 + (1 −ˆdn · dn) + ∥ˆbn −bn∥1.
(4)
A regularization term is included as well to constrain the residual vector ⃗δ towards 0. The overall
loss function, denoted as Lsuperres, then can be expressed as:
Lsuperres = λtex∥ˆTlow −Tlow∥1 + λgeoLgeo + λreg∥⃗δ∥2
2,
(5)
where the weighting factors λtex, λgeo and λreg are set to 1, 1 and 0.1, respectively.
3.2.3
RESIDUAL TEXTURE SYNTHESIS
To simulate the artistic process of creating different curl patterns, we train a neural network to ap-
proximate the function, D(⃗β; ϕ3) : R|⃗β| 7→R256×256×54, where we learn to synthesize the residual
texture Tres from the hair styling parameter ⃗β, and ϕ3 represents the trainable network parameters.
Although StyleGAN2 performs well in generating textures for guide strands, we found it struggles
with residual textures, as they contain more data than high-resolution RGB images. Therefore, we
6


Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025
opted for VAE (Kingma & Welling, 2013) as the backbone, where the encoder adopts an architecture
similar to pSp (Richardson et al., 2021), and the decoder takes the same architecture as StyleGAN2
generator. Essentially, the encoder E projects the residual texture Tres and baldness map M into the
latent space, where the latent vectors will then be used to modulate the decoder to reconstruct the
input. A similar loss function as Eq. 5 is defined as the training objective for the VAE, which can be
expressed as:
Lres = λtex(∥ˆTres −Tres∥1 + ∥ˆM −M∥1) + λgeoLgeo + λKLLKL,
(6)
where the reconstruction terms are computed on the residual texture, baldness map, and decoded
strand geometry. The weighting factors λtex, λgeo, and λKL are set to 10, 1, and 1e−4, respectively.
4
EXPERIMENTS
We train PERM on an augmented version of USC-HairSalon (Hu et al., 2015), which contains a total
of 21, 054 data samples. For evaluation, we compiled a separate dataset of 17 publicly available hair
models, comprising 151, 829 strands in total. Detailed data augmentation and source of our testing
data are provided in Appendix B.1. Since USC-HairSalon lacks sufficient curly hair data, we curated
a private dataset consisting of 80 manually groomed hairstyles, comprising a total of 4, 368, 679
strands with a greater diversity of style. We conducted experiments on this private dataset to further
validate the robustness of our representation, whose results are detailed in Appendix B.4.
4.1
STRAND REPRESENTATION
We first conducted extensive experiments to evaluate our PCA-based strand representation against
various alternative deep learning-based representations and a simpler PCA-based formulation with-
out DFT. Contrary to the common belief that neural network methods outperform linear models like
PCA, our experiments show that the PCA method performs better in the context of hair modeling.
To quantitatively assess their reconstruction capabilities, we present the mean position error (pos.
err.), computed as the average Euclidean distance between corresponding points on the reconstructed
strands and the ground truth. Additionally, we report the mean curvature error (cur. err.), defined
as the L1 norm between the curvatures of reconstructed and ground truth strands. Please refer to
Appendix B.3 for details of the metrics.
Table 1: Reconstruction errors reported on different strand representations. Here boldface corre-
sponds to the best result and underline means the second best.
Freq. VAE CNN VAE Transformer VAE
MLP VAE
PCA
Freq. PCA (Ours)
# params.
15.67M
759.24K
2.29M
15.67M
19.31K
19.50K
pos. err.
1.211
0.446
0.288
0.158
0.019
0.020
cur. err.
0.910
6.250
8.539
1.594
2.361
2.150
Quantitative results are reported in Table 1, where the deep learning-based strand representations
include a VAE model trained with frequency features (Freq. VAE) (Zhou et al., 2023), and other
VAE variants with CNN, Transformer (Vaswani et al., 2017), and ModSIREN MLP (Mehta et al.,
2021) decoders. All configurations compress strands to 64-dimensional vectors. While simple, our
PCA-based representations demonstrate a remarkably small position error, achieving this with a sig-
nificantly reduced number of parameters compared to all different VAE variants. It also significantly
reduces training time and GPU memory consumption due to its analytical computation. Note that
position error is more dominant in determining the quality of reconstruction. Although some VAEs
may achieve a lower curvature error, their reconstructed strands often appear noticeably different
from the ground truth because they fail to preserve the overall shape (see Fig. 5). To further demon-
strate the robustness of our strand representation, we trained all models on the curlier private dataset
and evaluated them using the same 17 publicly available hairstyles. Detailed experimental results
can be found in Appendix B.4, which reveal a trend similar to those in Table 1 (our PCA-based
representation achieves the lowest position error and a comparatively low curvature error).
7


Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
1.25
1.50
1.75
2.00
Freq. VAE
CNN VAE
Transformer VAE
MLP VAE
PCA
Freq. PCA (Ours)
Ground Truth
Figure 5: Comparison of our PCA-based strand representation (Freq. PCA) with other VAE and
PCA-based representations. Reconstructed strands are color-coded by their position error.
Additionally, with our proposed PCA-based strand representation, we can smooth a given hairstyle
by truncating its strand PCA coefficients (Fig. 6a, b), or transfer hairstyle details by blending the
low-rank and high-rank portions of PCA coefficients from different hairstyles (Fig. 6c – f).
(a) Style A: 64 coeff.
(b) Style A: 10 coeff.
(c) Style B: 64 coeff.
(d) B: 10 coeff. + A: 54 coeff. (e) Style C: 64 coeff.
(f) C: 10 coeff.+ A: 54 coeff.
Figure 6: Examples of hairstyle editing with our PCA-based strand representation. (a) and (b)
demonstrate hair smoothing by truncating the strand PCA coefficient from 64 to 10. (c) – (f) show
the detail transfer between different hairstyles.
4.2
FULL HAIR REPRESENTATION
3D Hair Parameterization
To evaluate our proposed hairstyle representation, we first fit PERM
parameters to target 3D hair models through differentiable optimization, which we term as 3D hair
parameterization. Technical details are provided in Appendix B.5. In Fig. 8 we present a subset of
fitted results that illustrate our model’s capability to accurately recover the given 3D hair models.
Even if the target hair has no guide strands, our model can generate reasonable guide strands to
depict their overall shapes, obtaining directly from S
 G(⃗θ∗)

.
GroomGen (Zhou et al., 2023)
Ours
Figure 7: Comparison with our implementation of GroomGen (Zhou
et al., 2023) on random hairstyle synthesis. Full results are available
in Fig. 27.
Comparison with Groom-
Gen
The most relevant
previous work is Groom-
Gen (Zhou et al., 2023)
that learns hierarchical rep-
resentations of 3D hair. As
there is no publicly avail-
able GroomGen code, we
implemented and trained
it on the same augmented
USC-HairSalon
dataset.
We
also
contacted
the
authors to obtain part of
their official checkpoints to
verify the correctness of our implementation. Detailed verification can be found in Appendix C.4,
where we compared each network module with the available official checkpoints to demonstrate
the correctness of our implementation. Through experiments with our implementation, we found
the neural upsampler module in GroomGen, which is a GAN architecture, is very unstable to train,
frequently leading to collapsed results. In Fig. 7 we visualize randomly synthesized hairstyles
by sampling our parameter space and GroomGen’s latent space with the same Gaussian noise,
demonstrating their collapsed output with weird shapes and curls. We further conducted a quan-
8


Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025
titative evaluation of reconstruction errors on the 17 testing hairstyles, where our model achieves
a position error of 1.658 and curvature error of 0.769, both of which are lower than GroomGen’s
corresponding values (position error 2.570, curvature error 6.199). During quantitative evaluation,
we also found that 100 points per strand are insufficient to faithfully represent long kinky hairstyles.
Examples are provided in Fig. 25.
Figure 8: A subset of 3D hair models fitted by PERM.
5
APPLICATIONS
M(⃗θ, ⃗β, R)
T
 M(⃗θ, ⃗β, R)

Hair Mask Mrender
Strand Map Orender
GT Strand Map Ogt
Input Image
Figure 9: Illustration of our differentiable
rendering pipeline for single-view hair re-
construction.
Single-view Hair Reconstruction
With 2D ob-
servations as input, we can reconstruct 3D hair by
optimizing PERM parameters to minimize the en-
ergy of generated hair when projected to the 2D
images.
To fit 3D hair to 2D supervisions, we
design a differentiable rendering pipeline, as illus-
trated in Fig. 9. In the pipeline, we pre-compute
the transformation between our in-house head mesh
and SMPL-X (Pavlakos et al., 2019), denoted as the
function T , thus placing strand polylines generated
from PERM onto SMPL-X. We then attach a cylin-
der mesh onto each strand segment, as well as com-
puting the 3D orientation of each vertex as the per-
vertex feature. These features are projected and ren-
dered using Nvdiffrast (Laine et al., 2020) with the
estimated camera parameters, thereby obtaining the
rendered hair mask Mrender and strand map Orender.
By computing the pixel-wise mask loss and strand
map loss similar to HairStep (Zheng et al., 2023), gradients are back-propagated to optimize ⃗θ and
⃗β with decoupled weight decay regularization (Loshchilov & Hutter, 2017). A penetration loss is
applied as well to penalize hair intersecting the body geometry.
In Fig. 10 and Fig. 30, we qualitatively compare our single-view reconstruction results with
HairStep (Zheng et al., 2023), the state-of-the-art open-source method for single-view hair recon-
struction. With PERM as a robust prior to ensure the generation quality, our method not only excels
at reconstructing the global structure of the reference hairstyle but also better preserves local curl
patterns compared to HairStep. With the introduction of penetration loss, our algorithm effectively
handles input images with large and tilted head poses, avoiding outputs with unintended bald areas,
9


Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025
an artifact we occasionally observed in HairStep. In Fig. 31 we show the single-view reconstruction
results of HAAR (Sklyarova et al., 2023b), a recent text-conditioned hair generation method. How-
ever, since textual descriptions cannot capture the intricate details of a hairstyle, its output can only
produce a rough approximation.
PERM Parameter Editing
As we introduce separate parameters to control the global hair shape
and local strand details, we can edit the hairstyle with varying granularity by either swapping the
parameters from different hairstyles or interpolating the corresponding parameters. In the last row of
Fig. 30, we edit our reconstructed hairstyles by swapping their ⃗β parameters from a wavy reference
hairstyle, thereby altering their curl patterns while maintaining a similar haircut. More examples of
hairstyle interpolation are provided in Appendix D.2, with comparisons to (Weng et al., 2013) and
(Zhou et al., 2018).
Hair-conditioned Image Generation
Latest text-to-image (T2I) models (e.g., Adobe Fire-
fly (Adobe, 2024)) can generate high-quality portrait images. However, the text embedding of simple
prompts like “wavy and short hair” is not precise enough to represent a specific hairstyle. To tackle
this issue, we show the use of PERM in facilitating conditional image generation. Specifically, We
could use PERM to sample and edit hairstyles in 3D, or reconstruct 3D hairstyles from images, and
then feed the depth and edge information extracted from the hair geometry to the T2I models to
generate the final images. As shown in Fig. 32, pure text prompts often lead to images with different
hairstyles, while combined with the input hair reference, the generated images show a much more
consistent hairstyle. More examples are available in Fig. 33.
Input Images
Ours
HairStep
Figure 10: Single-view hair reconstruction on images with curly hair and tilted head poses, with
comparison to HairStep (Zheng et al., 2023). More examples are available in Fig. 30.
6
CONCLUSION
We present PERM, a parametric hair representation supporting independent control over the global
hair structure and local curl patterns. While our approach demonstrates strong performance when
trained on 3D hair models, exploring methods to develop a 3D generative model for hair from 2D
in-the-wild images remains a compelling direction for future research. Besides, since our uv-based
hair representation is compatible with the existing diffusion pipeline, with more data available, it
would be interesting to train a 3D diffusion model for full-head synthesis with controllable hair
modeling. Last but not least, aligning with trends in other 2D or 3D generative tasks, controllable
3D hair synthesis with multi-modal input signals presents another exciting avenue for future work
in this domain.
10
