Title: DifFRelight: Diffusion-Based Facial Performance Relighting

DifFRelight: Diffusion-Based Facial Performance Relighting
MINGMING HE∗, Netflix Eyeline Studios, United States of America
PASCAL CLAUSEN∗, Netflix Eyeline Studios, Canada
AHMET LEVENT TAŞEL∗, Netflix Eyeline Studios, Canada
LI MA∗, Netflix Eyeline Studios, United States of America
OLIVER PILARSKI∗†, Netflix Eyeline Studios, Germany
WENQI XIAN, Netflix Eyeline Studios, United States of America
LASZLO RIKKER, Netflix Eyeline Studios, United Kingdom
XUEMING YU, Netflix Eyeline Studios, United States of America
RYAN BURGERT, Netflix Eyeline Studios, United States of America
NING YU, Netflix Eyeline Studios, United States of America
PAUL DEBEVEC, Netflix Eyeline Studios, United States of America
Fig. 1. Flat-lit input and relit results of our diffusion-based relighting method. Top row: four flat-lit subjects transformed to colorful multi-directional
lighting. The flat-lit images are novel views generated by our dynamic 3D Gaussian Splatting extension from multi-view video. Bottom row: selected frames
from a dynamic flat-lit sequence alongside their relit counterparts with an animated lighting direction. Facial details show our method’s high-fidelity relighting
effects, including eye reflections, translucency, and self-shadowing.
We present a novel framework for free-viewpoint facial performance re-
lighting using diffusion-based image-to-image translation. Leveraging a
subject-specific dataset containing diverse facial expressions captured under
various lighting conditions, including flat-lit and one-light-at-a-time (OLAT)
scenarios, we train a diffusion model for precise lighting control, enabling
high-fidelity relit facial images from flat-lit inputs. Our framework includes
spatially-aligned conditioning of flat-lit captures and random noise, along
with integrated lighting information for global control, utilizing prior knowl-
edge from the pre-trained Stable Diffusion model. This model is then applied
to dynamic facial performances captured in a consistent flat-lit environment
∗Authors contributed equally to this work.
†Corresponding author.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the
author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
SA Conference Papers ’24, December 3–6, 2024, Tokyo, Japan
© 2024 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ACM ISBN 979-8-4007-1131-2/24/12...$15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3680528.3687644
and reconstructed for novel-view synthesis using a scalable dynamic 3D
Gaussian Splatting method to maintain quality and consistency in the relit
results. In addition, we introduce unified lighting control by integrating a
novel area lighting representation with directional lighting, allowing for
joint adjustments in light size and direction. We also enable high dynamic
range imaging (HDRI) composition using multiple directional lights to pro-
duce dynamic sequences under complex lighting conditions. Our evaluations
demonstrate the model’s efficiency in achieving precise lighting control and
generalizing across various facial expressions while preserving detailed fea-
tures such as skin texture and hair. The model accurately reproduces complex
lighting effects like eye reflections, subsurface scattering, self-shadowing,
and translucency, advancing photorealism within our framework.
CCS Concepts: • General and reference; • Computing methodologies
→Reconstruction; Image representations; Scene understanding; Bio-
metrics;
Additional Key Words and Phrases: Relighting, Stable Diffusion, image-to-
image translation, facial performances, data driven, HD facial data capture,
OLATs, HDRI reconstruction
ACM Reference Format:
Mingming He, Pascal Clausen, Ahmet Levent Taşel, Li Ma, Oliver Pilarski,
Wenqi Xian, Laszlo Rikker, Xueming Yu, Ryan Burgert, Ning Yu, and Paul
1
arXiv:2410.08188v1  [cs.CV]  10 Oct 2024


SA Conference Papers ’24, December 3–6, 2024, Tokyo, Japan
M. He, P. Clausen, A. Taşel, L. Ma, O. Pilarski, W. Xian, L. Rikker, X. Yu, R. Burgert, N. Yu and P. Debevec
Debevec. 2024. DifFRelight: Diffusion-Based Facial Performance Relight-
ing. In SIGGRAPH Asia 2024 Conference Papers (SA Conference Papers ’24),
December 3–6, 2024, Tokyo, Japan. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 18 pages.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3680528.3687644
1
INTRODUCTION
Today, photorealistic digital humans often play starring roles along-
side live-action actors, and appear with increasing fidelity in video
games and virtual reality. However, constructing photorealistic dig-
ital human models is difficult and expensive, and animating them
realistically – even with performance-capture data – is still chal-
lenging and prone to error.
Volumetric performance capture (volcap) systems use an array of
inward-pointing cameras to record dynamic human performances
in three dimensions, avoiding the need for traditional 3D character
modeling, rigging, and animation. Volcap captures all the nuances
of a performance, allowing it to be rendered into any 3D scene from
any angle. However, most capture techniques record the subject un-
der a single flat lighting condition, which hampers the achievement
of cinematic lighting effects and complicates the seamless integra-
tion of characters into new scenes. To address this, some advanced
systems [Guo et al. 2019] use time-multiplexed lighting to record
performances under multiple lighting conditions alternating each
frame. This approach enables data-driven relighting, sometimes
enhanced by machine learning inference [Meka et al. 2020; Zhang
et al. 2021a].
In this work, we achieve high-quality relighting of volumetrically
captured facial performances as shown in Fig. 1. This is accom-
plished by fine-tuning a diffusion-based image-to-image translation
model using subject-specific relighting examples. In addition to cap-
turing the performance under flat lighting, we record each subject
under a dense array of lighting directions across various facial ex-
pressions. We train a diffusion model for precise lighting control,
enabling the generation of high-fidelity relit facial images from
flat-lit inputs. This process involves spatially-aligned conditioning
of flat-lit captures and random noise, integrated with lighting in-
formation for global control, leveraging prior knowledge from the
pretrained stable diffusion model. Additionally, we use dynamic 3D
Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) to extrapolate the performance to novel
viewpoints.
Our work includes the following contributions:
(1) A novel framework for facial performance relighting that
trains on a subject-specific paired dataset and generalizes
to novel lighting conditions, enabling relighting from free
viewpoints and unseen facial expressions.
(2) A diffusion-based relighting model that spatially conditions
the flat-lit input image, utilizing lighting information as global
control to generate high-quality relit results.
(3) A scalable dynamic 3DGS technique for reconstructing long
sequences, ensuring temporal consistency in flat-lit inputs
for coherent inference by the relighting model.
(4) A unified lighting control that combines a new area lighting
representation with directional lighting, offering versatile
lighting controls as well as enabling the composition of com-
plex environment lighting.
2
RELATED WORK
2.1
Non-Diffusion-Based Relighting Methods
Parametric reflectance modeling measures a subject’s geometry and
reflectance properties from different views and lighting directions
but struggles with complex materials and dynamic subjects [Goesele
et al. 2004; Sato et al. 1997; Weyrich et al. 2006]. These techniques
struggle with complex materials, such as hair, and are difficult to
apply to dynamic subjects since observations under many lighting
conditions are required.
Image-based relighting photographs the subject under various
lighting conditions to create new lighting scenarios, which is effec-
tive but costly and challenging for dynamic subjects [Debevec et al.
2000; Einarsson et al. 2006; Nimeroff et al. 1995; Peers et al. 2007].
Intrinsic image relighting decomposes an image into intrinsic com-
ponents and recomposes it with modified lighting [Barron and Malik
2014; Le and Kakadiaris 2019; Li et al. 2018; Luan et al. 2017; Mei et al.
2024; Sengupta et al. 2018; Shih et al. 2014; Shu et al. 2017a,b; Sun
et al. 2019; Tewari et al. 2021a, 2020, 2021b; Wang et al. 2008; Zhou
et al. 2019]. Despite advancements, these methods face challenges
with complex shading effects and detail preservation. Recently, Kim
et al. [2024] propose a physically based rendering model for com-
puting diffuse and specular reflectance, inspired by [Pandey et al.
2021]. They can generalize to novel subjects but lack detail for skin
and hair reflectance, although refining with a neural renderer. Rao
et al. [2022] develop a model with a reflectance network trained on
OLAT images to learn a light-conditioned volumetric reflectance
field from a single photo, but it is limited to static faces and does
not address dynamic sequences.
Neural relighting approaches either use Neural Radiance Fields
(NeRFs) to reconstruct material properties and lighting effects in
3D but face challenges in novel poses and detail preservation [Boss
et al. 2021; Li et al. 2023b; Liu et al. 2023; Mildenhall et al. 2020;
Sarkar et al. 2023; Srinivasan et al. 2021; Wang et al. 2023a; Xu et al.
2023b; Yao et al. 2022; Zeng et al. 2023; Zhang et al. 2023b, 2021b], or
introduce 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) for relighting because of the
fine detail reconstruction [Gao et al. 2023; Kerbl et al. 2023]. Recent
research on relightable head avatars uses OLAT data and various
geometry representations, such as volumetric primitives [Yang et al.
2023], neural fields [Xu et al. 2023a], and 3DGS [Saito et al. 2023], to
enhance the rendering quality of facial details. The subject-specific
model [Saito et al. 2023] achieves promising facial performance
relighting by combining 3D Gaussians with a relightable appearance
model based on learnable radiance transfer. However, it necessitates
a significantly denser capture settings for expressions and requires
precise track of facial mesh and gaze motion and explicit modeling
of face and eyes, making this method difficult to generalize.
2.2
Diffusion-Based Relighting Methods
Diffusion models [Karras et al. 2022; Ke et al. 2023; Preechakul et al.
2022; Rombach et al. 2022; Song et al. 2020a,b; Wang et al. 2023b;
Zhang et al. 2023a] have demonstrated remarkable capabilities in
generating high-quality images by sampling from a learned distri-
bution of images, particularly when conditioned on spatial control
via image-to-image translation [Brooks et al. 2023; Ke et al. 2023;
Meng et al. 2021; Parmar et al. 2023; Wang et al. 2023b].
2


DifFRelight: Diffusion-Based Facial Performance Relighting
SA Conference Papers ’24, December 3–6, 2024, Tokyo, Japan
Scalable
Dynamic
3DGS
Flat-Lit Multi-View 
Performance
Deformable 3DGS
Diffusion-Based Relighting
VAE 
Encoder
VAE 
Decoder
Diffusion 
U-Net
Rendered Results
SH Encoding
Concatenation
Time & View & Light Control
Random 
Noise
As Text Embedding
Dynamic Performance Reconstruction
Relit Result
Fig. 2. The overview of the proposed relighting pipeline including dynamic performance reconstruction and diffusion-based relighting. Starting
with multi-view performance data of a subject in a neutral environment, we train a deformable 3DGS to create novel-view renderings of the dynamic sequence.
These serve as inputs for a diffusion-based relighting model, trained on paired data to translate flat-lit input images to relit results based on specified lighting.
Here, we show the inference step of the diffusion model, where the latent representation of the flat-lit image is concatenated with random noise as input for
the diffusion U-Net. Lighting information, encoded as SH encoding together with the text embedding, regulates the diffusion process.
Recently, researchers have leveraged conditional diffusion models
for relighting [Ding et al. 2023; Ponglertnapakorn et al. 2023; Zeng
et al. 2024]. These models leverage their ability to learn complex
light interactions, drawing on a generalizable generative prior that
has been pretrained on a large dataset of images under various light-
ing conditions. Additionally, they benefit from their controllability,
which is fine-tuned using flat-relit image pairs. DiffusionRig [Ding
et al. 2023] proposes to manipulate lighting and beyond by learning
a mapping from computer-generated imagery (CGI) to real images
using surface normals, albedo, and a diffuse shaded 3D morphable
model. DiFaReli [Ponglertnapakorn et al. 2023] uses existing esti-
mators for lighting, a 3D morphable model, the subject’s identity,
camera parameters, and a foreground mask, and trains a conditional
diffusion network that takes a diffuse rendered model under novel
lighting. Similarly, DiLightNet [Zeng et al. 2024] adopts a compara-
ble approach, offering multiple radiance hints (diffuse and specular)
without requiring a real-world captured input photograph, but is
not trained on human or face datasets. Unlike one-shot methods,
our approach uses multi-view, multi-pose data captured varying and
controlled lighting conditions, allowing us to focus on high-fidelity
identity-preserving reconstruction. We aim to generalize to arbi-
trary views, relighting conditions, and unseen poses, and prioritize
preserving the subject identity.
3
METHOD
Fig. 2 illustrates our dynamic facial performance relighting pipeline
with two main components: dynamic 3D performance reconstruc-
tion and diffusion-based relighting. Our approach begins with the
acquisition of multi-view performance sequences in a flat-lit envi-
ronment. Utilizing our scalable approach of dynamic 3D Gaussian
Splatting (3DGS), we first reconstruct deformable 3D Gaussians to
render the sequence from novel perspectives. Then we employ the
diffusion-based relighting model to generate new lighting for the
rendered image sequence, based on a specified lighting direction.
This model has been trained with subject-specific paired data of
flat-lit and OLAT images captured using a customized LED-panel
stage (Sec. 3.1), incorporating a new design of feeding flat-lit images
and lighting directions as spatial and global conditions into the
pretrained latent diffusion model (Sec. 3.2). To maintain temporal
(a) Capture Stage (Inside & Outside w/ and w/o Subject)
(b) Visualization of Captured Data
Fig. 3. Capture stage and data. (a) outside and inside of the LED panel
volcap stage based on the LED panels, with and without the subject. (b)
examples of our collected training data including variation in expression
(E), lighting (L), and viewpoint (V).
consistency in the dynamic relighting, we introduce a partition-
ing and combining scheme to train temporally-coherent 3DGS for
lengthy sequences and also apply temporal blending on the dynamic
relit results (Sec. 3.3). Additionally, we introduce a new variable-
sized area light representation for enhanced control over different
lighting types for various lighting compositions (Sec. 3.4).
3.1
Facial Data Capture
Capture Setup. To supervise the diffusion-based relighting model
and facilitate learning the translation of facial reflectance from flat
lighting to arbitrary lighting, we require paired training data where
lighting is the only changing variable. We use a volumetric capture
stage consisting of a multi-view array camera array placed within a
capped cylinder of LED panels as in Fig. 3 (a). By turning on different
LED panels, we capture the same subject under varying lighting
conditions. Furthermore, customizing the display patterns of LED
3


SA Conference Papers ’24, December 3–6, 2024, Tokyo, Japan
M. He, P. Clausen, A. Taşel, L. Ma, O. Pilarski, W. Xian, L. Rikker, X. Yu, R. Burgert, N. Yu and P. Debevec
panels enables us to record the subject under various backgrounds
and image-based lighting environments. We constructed this stage
as a cylindrical capture rig using off-the-shelf ROE BP2v2 LED
panels and 75 synchronized 4K Z-CAM e2 cinema cameras. The rig
comprises a 16 × 5 array of 50𝑐𝑚× 50𝑐𝑚panels (16 columns, each
consisting of 5 panels), forming a capture volume approximately 250
cm tall and 276 cm in diameter. The ceiling is covered with a 6 × 5
array of panels, and an additional 10 panels on the floor provide
additional lighting angles. The cameras peer in through 5cm gaps
in the walls and ceiling.
Lighting setup. Following LeGendre et al. [2020], we capture the
reflectance field as OLAT images using each panel in sequence as a
single light source at 24 frames per second in sync with the camera
array. As Debevec and LeGendre [2022] demonstrate, LED panels
are effective for image-based lighting on actors, so we use them
to simulate OLATs, with one light (=OL) equivalent to one LED
panel. Each panel approximates a 20-degree cone from the stage
center, producing less aliased shadows than point lights while still
capturing eye highlights and sharp specular reflections. We mini-
mize the panel size while maintaining sufficient illumination and
try to ensure uniformity in size and shape. Despite the large angular
coverage of each panel, in practice, our OLAT-based framework
works reasonably well when generalizing to environment lighting,
as shown in Fig. 7 and Fig. 16. We also capture flat-lit lighting to
have paired data for training the diffusion-based relighting model.
Data collection. We collected OLAT sequences for four individuals,
each demonstrating 30 facial expressions and head poses. Each OLAT
sequence has 123 lighting conditions with 13 interspersed flat-lit
tracking frames. This same flat-lit lighting is used to capture the
dynamic facial performance. Additionally, we recorded one OLAT
sequence of a clean plate without a subject to facilitate background
removal in 3DGS reconstruction. To compensate for the individual’s
slight movements during one OLAT sequence, we conduct optical
flow alignment in image space with respect to the flat-lit frames
for each view, following Meka et al. [2019]. When training the
relighting model, we convert linear images to sRGB color space for
better compatibility with the pretrained model weights.
3.2
Diffusion-Based Relighting
After data acquisition and preprocessing, we obtain a paired dataset
{I𝐹𝑙𝑎𝑡𝐿𝑖𝑡, I𝑂𝐿𝐴𝑇, d}, where I𝐹𝑙𝑎𝑡𝐿𝑖𝑡represents the flat-lit image, and
I𝑂𝐿𝐴𝑇denotes the OLAT image under light direction d. d is defined
as a directional vector pointing from the stage center to the center of
each panel in camera space. Our objective is to train a personalized
model capable of relighting the flat-lit image of the same subject
under novel views, novel lightings, and novel expressions/poses.
Given the limited set of training pairs we have captured, a strong
prior is essential for the model to generalize to unseen conditions.
Rather than relying on physically-based lighting models, which
often fail to accurately simulate complex shading effects such as
anisotropic materials and subsurface scattering, we employ a purely
data-driven prior to ensure the photorealism of our output. We
use a diffusion-based approach that leverages the prior knowledge
encapsulated in the pre-trained Stable Diffusion model [Rombach
et al. 2022].
We formulate our problem as an image-to-image translation that
transfers a flat-lit image I𝐹𝑙𝑎𝑡𝐿𝑖𝑡to the corresponding OLAT image
I𝑂𝐿𝐴𝑇under the condition d. Inspired by recent monocular depth
estimation works [Ke et al. 2023], we adapt Stable Diffusion’s archi-
tecture to fine-tune it with our paired data conditioned on lighting
information, achieving robust performance in relighting tasks.
The Stable Diffusion model [Rombach et al. 2022] is originally
designed as a latent diffusion model for text-to-image generation. It
comprises a Variational Autoencoder (VAE) that encodes an image
I into the latent space z = E(I) and decodes it back to I ≈D(z).
Additionally, it includes a diffusion U-Net ˆ𝜖(z(𝑡); s,𝑡), which predicts
the noise of a partially denoised latent z(𝑡) conditioned on some text
embedding s and the diffusion timestep 𝑡. By iteratively removing
noise from random noise, we obtain a clean image latent z(0), which
can then be decoded back into an image D(z(0)).
To transform the image generation framework into an image-to-
image translation model and more effectively leverage the spatial
information in the flat-lit image, we modify the U-Net by concatenat-
ing the latent of the flat-lit image with the random noise map. This
necessitates a minor change in the network structure: specifically,
doubling the input channel count of the first convolutional layer.
These minimal adjustments enable us to maximize the retention of
the pre-trained weights from Stable Diffusion. Additionally, con-
catenating the latents with random noise improves the alignment
of the spatial structure between the relit result and the input.
In addition to the flat-lit image, which offers spatial cues to the
resulting output, the lighting information acts as a crucial global
control signal that influences the entire image. We encode light
direction d into higher dimensions and replace text embeddings by
introducing it into the U-Net through cross-attention in diffusion
models. To increase the frequency band of d and enhance the condi-
tioning, we use Spherical Harmonics (SH) to encode d, similar to
techniques used by Tancik et al. [2023]. We also zero-pad the SH
encoding to match the length of the text embedding:
s𝑑= 0 ⊕Y(d),
(1)
where ⊕indicates concatenation, and Y indicates the SH encoding.
Initially, this may appear unusual as the SH encoding is nothing
like a text embedding, which is predicted by some text encoder
[Schuhmann et al. 2022]. However, we find that the fine-tuning is
adequate for filling the domain gap between the text embedding
and SH encoding. We set the SH degree to 3 for all model training,
as it showed the best performance in our experiments (see Sec. 5.1
in the supplemental material).
At training time, we freeze the VAE encoder and decoder, as both
the flat-lit and OLAT-lit images lie within the manifold of the VAE’s
latent space. We randomly select training pairs from the dataset and
fine-tune the diffusion U-Net using the denoising diffusion objective:
Ldiffusion = ∥ˆ𝜖

z(𝑡)
𝑂𝐿𝐴𝑇⊕E(I𝐹𝑙𝑎𝑡𝐿𝑖𝑡); s𝑑,𝑡

−𝜖∥2
2,
(2)
4


DifFRelight: Diffusion-Based Facial Performance Relighting
SA Conference Papers ’24, December 3–6, 2024, Tokyo, Japan
!!!
…
…
…
…
K
K
K
K
K
Stage1: K-frame Training
Stage2: Segment Training
!!"
!!#
!!$%!
!!$
""
"#
"$
…
K
K
"#
…
K
K
""
Initialization
Initial point cloud
3D Gaussians
%
%, ', (
)%
)'
)(
D
Fig. 4. Two-stage training of the scalable dynamic 3DGS. We first
sample 𝐾frames to partition the long sequence into segments 𝑆1,𝑆2, ...𝑆𝑘.
At Stage 1, we train the deformable 3DGS on the 𝐾frames only to generate
the initialization for the training of each segment at Stage 2. Then we train
a deformable 3DGS for each segment but conditioned on the initialization.
where z(𝑡)
𝑂𝐿𝐴𝑇is a noisy ground truth latent at diffusion time step 𝑡,
combining ground truth latent E(I𝑂𝐿𝐴𝑇) and random noise map 𝜖:
z(𝑡)
𝑂𝐿𝐴𝑇= √𝛼𝑡E(I𝑂𝐿𝐴𝑇) + √1 −𝛼𝑡𝜖.
(3)
Here𝛼𝑡is a predefined value that schedules the diffusion process. We
find that using naive Gaussian noise results in substantial color shift.
This is likely due to the inductive bias that the network struggles
to predict very dark images using zero-meaned Gaussian noise
[Guttenberg 2023] for 𝜖. Pyramid noise, as introduced in [Whitaker
2024], greatly improves the color consistency between the prediction
and the ground truth.
We fine-tune one personalized model for each subject using the
captured data. During inference, we are able to relight a flat-lit
image of the same subject under arbitrary combinations of facial
expression, camera pose, and light direction.
3.3
Dynamic Performance Relighting
To ensure temporally consistent relit results when applying the
pre-trained diffusion-based relighting model to flat-lit facial per-
formances, our initial goal is to minimize the domain gap between
training and testing by generating photorealistic novel-view render-
ings. Additionally, maintaining temporal consistency in the flat-lit
inputs enhances the diffusion model’s performance under consis-
tent conditions. In line with these requirements, we utilize 3D Gaus-
sians [Kerbl et al. 2023] as the geometry representation for capturing
fine details in real-time rendering. 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS)
can be extended to the temporal domain [Jung et al. 2023; Li et al.
2023a; Luiten et al. 2023; Wu et al. 2023]. Deformable 3DGS [Jung
et al. 2023] learns a deformation field for each frame within the
canonical space of 3D Gaussians that is shared across all frames.
The deformation field takes the positions of the 3D Gaussians x
and the current time 𝑡as inputs, outputting the offset for position
x, rotation r, and scaling s as 𝛿𝑡x, 𝛿𝑡r, and 𝛿𝑡s. While preserving
details in short videos, this method faces challenges in accurately
representing motion and maintaining intricate details in long se-
quences due to its use of globally shared Gaussians, which struggle
with the complexities of extended sequences.
We introduce a novel scalable method based on the deformable
3DGS [Jung et al. 2023] to optimize 3D Gaussians for lengthy perfor-
mance sequences, thereby generating temporally consistent recon-
struction. Instead of training all frames together with one shared
set of Gaussians, we partition it into small segments with an equal
number of frames, allowing varying Gaussians across segments. To
minimize temporal inconsistency at the transition frame between
segments and to preserve a similar level of reconstruction details
across segments, we design a two-stage training strategy. As shown
in Fig.4, in Stage 1, we evenly distribute 𝐾keyframes in the entire
sequence, and then train a deformable Gaussian splatting model
based on the keyframes only, generating the pretrained 𝐾-frame
model. In Stage 2, using the 𝐾frames as transition points, we parti-
tion the entire sequence into 𝐾−1 segments, each containing two
keyframes (one at the beginning and the other at the end). Inside
every segment, we initialize the 3D Gaussians and the deformation
network using the pretrained 𝐾-frame model based on the time of
its first frame in the global time range. The geometry information
of 3D Gaussians (such as positions x, rotations r and scalings s)
is initialized as the pretained 𝐾-frame Gaussians transformed by
the deformation offset of the first frame 𝑡𝑘0. In this way, we ensure
the initial states of 3D Gaussians in different segments are tempo-
rally consistent with similar level of details. To further enhance the
consistency, we fix the initial Gaussians and train the deformation
network only for the warm-up iterations (we use 3000 iterations
as default), with the regularization term defined as 𝐿2 loss on the
deformation offset of keyframes 𝑘0 and 𝑘1:
L𝑟𝑒𝑔= ∥𝛿′
𝑡𝑘0 −𝛿𝑡𝑘0 ∥2 + ∥𝛿′
𝑡𝑘1 −𝛿𝑡𝑘1 ∥2,
(4)
where 𝛿𝑡𝑘0 and 𝛿𝑡𝑘1 are initial deformation offset of 𝑡𝑘0 and 𝑡𝑘1 while
𝛿′
𝑡𝑘0 and 𝛿′
𝑡𝑘1 indicates the learned offset with respect to x, r and s.
This warm-up training allows the Gaussians to freely deform
to reconstruct motions while being restricted to the deformation
of keyframes at transition points. After this stage, most Gaussians
are in the correct position, and we relax the constraints to allow
Gaussians to clone, split, and prune for detailed reconstruction for
a number of iterations (defaulting to 10000 iterations). After the
densification, we fix the number of Gaussians and jointly optimize
the deformation network and the Gaussians. The ablation of the
two-stage training method is included in the supplemental material.
Although we ensure temporal consistency in the reconstructed
flat-lit sequence used as input for our relighting model, the image-
based diffusion model may still produce temporally inconsistent
high frequencies. To address this, we adopt the method from [Jam-
riška et al. 2019], applying a temporal blending approach to inter-
polate relit results between keyframes. We use a small step size of 4
to sample keyframes and preserve details and lighting accuracy.
3.4
Unified Lighting Control
To provide the users with flexible lighting control, we propose a
novel area lighting representation, which includes both lighting
direction and a variable light size. This is integrated with our direc-
tional lighting into a unified lighting control to guide the diffusion-
based relighting model. Based on the single-lighting inference, we
can enable HDRI environment lighting reconstruction by composit-
ing multiple single-lighting inferences.
Area-light training. To infer lights of various sizes – from point
lighting to diffuse – we modify our training in two ways. First,
we multiply the light direction by a light size factor 1 −𝑎, with
𝑎ranging from 0 (indicating a single OLAT) to 1 (representing
5


SA Conference Papers ’24, December 3–6, 2024, Tokyo, Japan
M. He, P. Clausen, A. Taşel, L. Ma, O. Pilarski, W. Xian, L. Rikker, X. Yu, R. Burgert, N. Yu and P. Debevec
the flat-lit), which represents the spread of the light and thus its
sharpness. Second, we construct our ground truth target by combin-
ing OLAT images to simulate isotropic Spherical Gaussian (SG)
illumination. Then the light size factor is linked to the Spheri-
cal Gaussian’s sharpness by the formula 𝜆=
−𝑐𝑜𝑠(𝜃)
(𝑐𝑜𝑠(𝜃)2−1) with
𝜃= 𝑎· (𝜃𝑚𝑎𝑥−𝜃𝑚𝑖𝑛) + 𝜃𝑚𝑖𝑛, 𝜋
2 being the inflection point of an SG
and 𝜃𝑚𝑖𝑛= 1 ·
𝜋
180, 𝜃𝑚𝑎𝑥= 89 ·
𝜋
180.
HDRI reconstruction. To relight a performance under an HDRI
environment using our model conditioned on a single lighting, we
first map an HDRI latitude-longitude (lat-long) representation to the
OLATs, with each OLAT’s weighting coefficient being an average
from its corresponding area on the HDRI lat-long. During inference,
we generate an image for each OLAT direction and compute a
weighted sum of these OLATs in linear space using their fitted
coefficients. Additionally, the HDRI map can be reconstructed using
our model conditioned on both light direction and size by first
fitting Spherical Gaussians onto the HDRI lat-long representation
and then inferring for each light direction and size. Similarly to
the OLATs, we compute a weighted sum of the predictions using
the fitted coefficients of these Spherical Gaussians. If the HDRI is
animated, we adjust the conditioned directions of the OLATs or
Spherical Gaussians to match the rotation of the HDRI.
4
EXPERIMENTS
We have conducted multiple experiments to evaluate the perfor-
mance of our diffusion-based relighting model, particularly its gen-
eralization across various dimensions including novel lightings,
expressions, and views. We compare our model with two baselines
constructed using different network structures from the related
methods. Additionally, we perform ablation studies to verify various
technical designs within our system and conduct a simple extension
to assess model generalization to novel subjects. For more results on
dynamic performance relighting and detailed experiments, please
refer to the accompanying video and supplemental material.
4.1
Implementation Details
We capture 30 expressions (30𝐸), 123 OLATs (123𝐿), and 75 views
(75𝑉) for each of the 4 subjects and downsample 4K captures to
1080 × 1920. For training, we use the Cartesian product of 27𝐸×
115𝐿× 69𝑉, with the rest reserved for validation. Capturing all
OLAT data for each subject takes a few minutes. For inference, we
record 10-15 seconds of performances in a multi-view capture stage
under flat lighting. We implement our diffusion-based relighting
system using Diffusers [Face 2024] based on Stable Diffusion v2.1.
Our custom models are trained on 8 NVIDIA A100 GPUs with 40GB
memory each, for 100K iterations with a batch size of 8. We use an
Adam optimizer with a learning rate of 3 · 10−5. We use a DDPM
scheduler with 1000 steps for training and a DDIM scheduler with
30 steps for inference which takes about 5-6 seconds per frame
on a single A100 GPU. Our dynamic 3DGS is also trained in full
HD resolution. Given a long sequence, we divide it into segments
based on the number of keyframes, typically including 20 frames
per segment. We then train the deformable 3DGS for 40K iterations
for each segment.
Table 1. Quantitative comparison on different relighting methods.
Novel Light
PSNR ↑
SSIM ↑
LPIPS ↓
FLIP ↓
Ours
30.29
.8212
.1750
.0825
U-Net-based
23.66
.7971
.2988
.1586
ControlNet-based
20.30
.6708
.2281
.2304
Novel Expression
PSNR ↑
SSIM ↑
LPIPS ↓
FLIP ↓
Ours
31.55
.8281
.1585
.0689
U-Net-based
23.86
.7916
.2887
.1479
ControlNet-based
20.50
.6423
.2284
.2382
Novel View
PSNR ↑
SSIM ↑
LPIPS ↓
FLIP ↓
Ours
31.77
.8254
.1601
.0689
U-Net-based
24.51
.7907
.29095
.1397
ControlNet-based
20.52
.6375
.2304
.2358
Novel LEV
PSNR ↑
SSIM ↑
LPIPS ↓
FLIP ↓
Ours
30.98
.8229
.1729
.0754
U-Net-based
24.55
.8010
.2961
.1440
ControlNet-based
20.51
.6490
.2301
.2425
4.2
Results
We showcase the effectiveness of our diffusion-based relighting
method on the testing data of the four captured subjects. The visual
results in Fig. 1, Fig. 10, and Fig. 11 demonstrate that our method
reproduces realistic skin texture and reflectance, eye highlights, and
fine hair structures while maintaining the subject-specific identity
features. The novel lighting animation creates a realistic interplay
of shadows and shading across the face. Fig. 11 shows our unified
lighting control with both directional and area lights, and as an
application to our lighting control, Fig. 7 shows the results relit by
HDRI environment maps. In addition to varying lighting conditions,
expression changes are illustrated in Fig. 10.
4.3
Comparisons
Since no existing works employ the same training and testing set-
tings as our method, we establish baselines using two different net-
work structures: a diffusion-based model built on ControlNet [Zhang
et al. 2023a] and a U-Net-based model inspired by a state-of-the-art
image-based relighting technique of [Pandey et al. 2021]. We adapt
ControlNet to condition on a 3-channel flat-lit image and a 1-channel
diffuse shading map, obtained by creating a diffuse shading map
using the dot product between the lighting direction and photomet-
ric normals. Photometric normals are computed using a standard
method [Ma et al. 2007] for subjects captured under gradient illu-
mination. This model is trained under the same settings as ours at
1080 × 1920 resolution using 8 A100 GPUs for 100K iterations with
a batch size of 8. The other baseline, a U-Net-based image-to-image
translation network, is directly conditioned on the lighting direction,
diverging from the use of intrinsic features (normals, albedo, specu-
lar) in the referenced architecture to minimize the negative impact
caused by inaccurate intrinsic decomposition on a small dataset.
Both models are trained using the same data, and we evaluate all
methods across four validation configurations: Novel Light, Novel
Expression, Novel View, and Novel Light+Expression+View (LEV), in-
troducing complexities in one or three dimensions. We quantify
differences between the relit images and ground truth by computing
PSNR, SSIM, LPIPS [Zhang et al. 2018], and FLIP [Andersson et al.
6


DifFRelight: Diffusion-Based Facial Performance Relighting
SA Conference Papers ’24, December 3–6, 2024, Tokyo, Japan
Table 2. Quantitative results for the ablations. Our method with shading
map condition achieves the best result. However, it requires photometric
normal as additional input, which increases the cost of capturing the data.
PSNR ↑
SSIM ↑
LPIPS ↓
FLIP ↓
Our final model
30.04
.8141
.1719
.0859
Ours w/ shading map
30.32
.8164
.1686
.0836
Ours w/o pyramid noise
26.55
.7683
.1776
.1433
Ours w/o pre-trained
28.26
.8014
.1937
.1041
GT
Ours
w/o pyramid noise
Fig. 5. Visual comparison between using and not using pyramid noise
during training. Using pyramid noise improves the color consistency
between the prediction and GT. We increase the brightness of the images
by 20% to exaggerate the error.
2020], as detailed in Tab. 1. Visual comparisons of these methods
with the ground truth are shown in Fig. 15.
The quantitative results reveal that the ControlNet-based method
underperforms in preserving spatial details and color accuracy, re-
flected by the lowest PSNR, SSIM, and FLIP scores, because it only
leverages sparse spatial information. Moreover, it is less sensitive to
color shifts, leading to noticeable color differences. The U-Net-based
method aligns better spatially with the flat-lit image but tends to
produce blurrier results, which improves pixel-level metrics but di-
minishes photorealism as measured by LPIPS. Our method achieves
the best quantitative outcomes, significantly enhancing lighting
accuracy, color fidelity, and overall image quality.
4.4
Ablation Studies
4.4.1
Ablation studies on diffusion-based relighting. We conducted
various ablation studies to evaluate the key technical designs in
our diffusion-based relighting model. We first try different meth-
ods to integrate lighting control by providing the model with a
rough shading estimation. We generate a shading map akin to our
strategy in the ControlNet-based relighting model, i.e. dot product
between light direction and photometric normal. A visualization
of the normal and shading map can be seen in Fig. 14. We then
concatenate the latent of the shading map with the flat-lit latent
and random noise as input for the diffusion U-Net. We compare
the lighting condition with shading map and SH encoding and re-
sults are shown in Fig. 14 and Tab. 2. The numerical results indicate
that the shading-map-conditioned model slightly outperforms ours
due to the use of its richer shading and geometric detail as spatial
control. However, capturing photometric normals in multi-view
GT
Ours
w/o pre-trained
Fig. 6. Ablation study on using pre-trained model weights. We ablate
our method by randomly initializing the model weights instead of loading
from a pre-trained model (w/o pre-trained). Results show that loading from
a pre-trained stable diffusion model helps generate photorealistic results
with fewer artifacts.
Table 3. Quantitative comparison on different models of dynamic 3DGS.
PSNR ↑
SSIM ↑
LPIPS ↓
Baseline model [Jung et al. 2023]
30.202
0.876
0.254
(a) Partition w/o K-frame
31.717
0.893
0.239
(b) Partition w/ K-frame
31.114
0.901
0.218
(c) Partition w/ K-frame & 𝐿𝑟𝑒𝑔(Ours)
31.979
0.903
0.216
dynamic settings is challenging due to hardware constraints. No-
tably, our method does not require time-multiplexed lighting during
performance capture, allowing for more comfortable flat lighting
and reducing costs by eliminating the need for high-speed global-
shutter cameras. Therefore, our approach can achieve comparable
performance without relying on photometric normals, making it
suitable for more applications.
To determine which factor contributes the most to color fidelity
and overall result quality, we disabled the training strategy that uses
pyramid noise ("w/o pyramid noise") and removed the initializa-
tion that uses the pre-trained Stable Diffusion ("w/o pre-trained").
Quantitative results are detailed in Tab. 2. The model performance
noticeably degrades without the pyramid noise, as reflected by a de-
crease in all evaluation metrics. A visual comparison in Fig. 5 further
demonstrates that pyramid noise enables more accurate predictions
of darker pixels with less color shifting, which likely explains why
our method better preserves color fidelity. Additionally, fine-tuning
the network based on pre-trained stable diffusion is crucial as it
provides strong prior knowledge to generating photorealistic relit
results. Without pre-trained weights, the model tends to generate
more artifacts, as illustrated in Fig. 6.
4.4.2
Ablation studies on scalable dynamic 3D Gaussian Splatting.
To demonstrate the effectiveness of our scalable dynamic 3DGS, we
compare it with three baselines: (1) the original deformable 3DGS
model [Jung et al. 2023]; (2) a model partitioning long sequences for
separate training without our K-frame initialization (K-frame) or
deformation offset regularization (𝐿𝑟𝑒𝑔); and (3) a model using par-
titioning and K-frame but without 𝐿𝑟𝑒𝑔. We evaluate by holding out
7


SA Conference Papers ’24, December 3–6, 2024, Tokyo, Japan
M. He, P. Clausen, A. Taşel, L. Ma, O. Pilarski, W. Xian, L. Rikker, X. Yu, R. Burgert, N. Yu and P. Debevec
Fig. 7. HDRI relighting examples. We can relight a subject under any
HDR environment by initially incorporating the HDRI into multiple OLATs
or area lights. Then, we relight the subject individually using each OLAT
through our diffusion-based relighting method, before compositing the final
result in the image space.
Ground Truth
Subject-specific
Single-subject
Three-subject
Fig. 8. Generalization capacity. We test the generalizability of our model
by evaluating on an unseen subject. Our subject-specific model best pre-
serves identity when trained and tested on the same subject. Interestingly,
the single-subject model can relight a new subject but may inherit features
like skin texture and lip color from the training subject. If trained on three
other subjects, the model can better preserve the new subject’s unique fea-
tures but still shows noticeable changes in color and fine details.
10% of the captured views from one subject’s dynamic sequences,
using quantitative metrics. Tab. 3 shows improvements in recon-
struction quality and consistency with the proposed strategies.
5
REAL-WORLD HDRI RELIGHTING
Since our method infers OLAT images from any viewpoint that
closely match the ground truth, it can reproduce real-world lighting
conditions from HDRI maps, following [Debevec et al. 2000]. To
evaluate this, we capture reference images of one trained subject
in complex indoor and outdoor environments, using HDRI maps
to reconstruct the lighting. For comparison, we render the flat-lit
subject from similar viewpoints and input these into our relighting
model. For each HDRI map, we generate two results: one using
the OLAT-based model and the other using the area-light model.
Raw Output
Frame 1
Frame 2
Frame 3
Fig. 9. Limitation. The post-processing keyframe interpolation may cause
artifacts, such as double strips on shirts, due to inaccurate warping from
fast camera motion, which affects the precision of optical flow estimation.
In OLAT-based relighting, we linearly combine the results of 123
OLATs, while in area-light relighting, we approximate the HDRI
map using 15 Spherical Gaussians (SGs), infer for each SG, and then
combine their results. To account for spectral differences between
LED and real-world lighting, we capture a color chart in both envi-
ronments and compute a constant 3-channel scaling factor to correct
the relit image. Fig. 16 shows that our results are comparable to
reference images under complex lighting conditions.
6
MODEL GENERALIZATION
Although our model is primarily trained on the subject-specific data,
which limits its generalization capacity for novel subjects, the model
learns to translate from flat to directional lighting, a process that is
somewhat subject-agnostic. However, subject-specific information
from the model, especially high-frequency details, may remain in the
results, as in Fig. 8. To assess whether training on multiple subjects’
data reduces such subject-specific information, we train a model
using data from three subjects. This model shows improved perfor-
mance on a novel subject, better preserving the subject’s identity,
though color shifts are still prominent. This suggests the potential
for training a general relighting model using more subjects.
7
LIMITATIONS
Our technique has a few limitations; for one, we do not completely
resolve the temporal consistency issue of image-based diffusion
models due to the absence of video training data, and our optical
flow post-processing occasionally introduces artifacts during rapid
movements, as illustrated in Fig. 9. Emerging video diffusion models
hold promise for solving this issue. Secondly, our subject-specific
training is not designed to generalize to unseen subjects and can
alter identity features in the relit results, as shown in our extension.
We believe this limitation could be addressed by training on a diverse,
multi-person dataset and/or implementing identity disentanglement
techniques. Lastly, we would need to add full-body training data for
our relighting technique to be applied to full-body performances.
8
CONCLUSION
The proposed method shows promising results in relighting free-
viewpoint flat-lit facial performances to various lighting conditions
using subject-specific OLAT training data. It demonstrates enhanced
performance in replicating eye highlights, skin luster, and hair de-
tails compared to prior image-based methods, which start with a
8


DifFRelight: Diffusion-Based Facial Performance Relighting
SA Conference Papers ’24, December 3–6, 2024, Tokyo, Japan
single diffuse lighting condition. Leveraging an underlying diffusion
model allows us to achieve well-conditioned results while main-
taining the original subject’s appearance and identity by finetuning
on subject-specific data. These findings suggest a promising direc-
tion for advancing relightable volumetric capture production and
facilitating postproduction relighting of any flat-lit footage.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Stephan Trojansky and Jeffrey Shapiro for initiation and
ongoing support; Gabriel Dedic for invaluable help on imaging;
Jon Milward, Samuel Price for stage operation; Connie Siu, Amir
Shachar, Kevin Williams, Marc Thorineaux, Alex Chun for stage
coordination; Rafe Sacks, Scott Wilson for data preprocessing; Sunny
Koya, Daniel Heckenberg, Pablo Delgado, Elliot Chow for technical
support; the software department for stage software maintenance;
Brian Tong for video editing, and our performers: Kevin Williams,
Mary Carr, Zorianna Kit, and Naz Lang.
9


SA Conference Papers ’24, December 3–6, 2024, Tokyo, Japan
M. He, P. Clausen, A. Taşel, L. Ma, O. Pilarski, W. Xian, L. Rikker, X. Yu, R. Burgert, N. Yu and P. Debevec
Fig. 10. Novel facial expressions under a rotated directional lighting. Each row shows every 12th frame of a performance sequence of 120 frames for an
individual actor, having a novel facial expression every frame.
Fig. 11. Unified lighting control combining directional and area lights. The image sequence shows an animated area light on a performance sequence
with a fixed view. The area light animates linearly back and forth between a directional light (0 degree area light) and a 360 degree area light. In order to
compute the reflectance fields of an area light, weighted captured OLAT images are linearly combined.
Fig. 12. Subject seen under novel directional lightings, following a horizontal 180 degree rotational path.
Fig. 13. Subject seen under 10 novel views, following a 180 rotation around the subject.
Input
Photometric normal
Shading map
Ours w/ shading map
Ours w/ SH encoding
GT
Fig. 14. Comparisons between different lighting condition methods, shading map and SH encoding. We also visualize the photometric normal and
shading map, where the shading map is the dot product between photometric normal and light direction. The two methods achieve comparable visual quality,
whereas the method conditioned on the shading map requires the photometric normal as additional input.
10
