Title: Headnerf: A real-time nerf-based parametric head model

HeadNeRF: A Real-time NeRF-based Parametric Head Model
Yang Hong
Bo Peng
Haiyao Xiao
Ligang Liu
Juyong Zhang*
University of Science and Technology of China
{hymath@mail., pb15881461858@mail., xhy1999512@mail., lgliu@, juyong@}ustc.edu.cn
Identity
Expression
Albedo
Illumination
~
HeadNeRF
Appearance
Expression
Identity
Pose
Figure 1. HeadNeRF, a NeRF-based parametric head model, is able to render high ﬁdelity head images in real-time, and supports directly
controlling the generated images’ rendering pose, and various semantic attributes. The images in the black area are generated by exploring
the latent space of HeadNeRF.
Abstract
In this paper, we propose HeadNeRF, a novel NeRF-
based parametric head model that integrates the neural
radiance ﬁeld to the parametric representation of the hu-
man head. It can render high ﬁdelity head images in real-
time on modern GPUs, and supports directly controlling the
generated images’ rendering pose and various semantic at-
tributes. Different from existing related parametric models,
we use the neural radiance ﬁelds as a novel 3D proxy in-
stead of the traditional 3D textured mesh, which makes that
HeadNeRF is able to generate high ﬁdelity images. How-
ever, the computationally expensive rendering process of the
original NeRF hinders the construction of the parametric
NeRF model. To address this issue, we adopt the strategy
of integrating 2D neural rendering to the rendering pro-
cess of NeRF and design novel loss terms. As a result, the
rendering speed of HeadNeRF can be signiﬁcantly acceler-
ated, and the rendering time of one frame is reduced from
5s to 25ms. The well designed loss terms also improve the
rendering accuracy, and the ﬁne-level details of the human
head, such as the gaps between teeth, wrinkles, and beards,
*Corresponding Author
can be represented and synthesized by HeadNeRF. Exten-
sive experimental results and several applications demon-
strate its effectiveness.
The trained parametric model is
available at https://github.com/CrisHY1995/headnerf.
1. Introduction
The parametric face/head model, which encodes the
human face/head in low-dimensional space, is a hot re-
search topic in computer vision and computer graphics
and widely used in many applications like identity recog-
nition [34, 52], face analysis [11, 64] and ﬁlm/game pro-
duction [47], etc. Early works of the parametric face/head
model [3, 6, 11, 30, 41, 57] mainly model 3D faces with the
topologically uniformed face template mesh and usually ig-
nore to represent the non-face parts, such as hair and teeth.
With the development of deep learning, 2D generative ad-
versarial networks (GAN) [21,22] are able to directly render
photo-realistic face images without the help of 3D model-
ing. Some methods [5,9,14,26,36] further introduce seman-
tically disentangled constraints to render the face images in
a user-controlled way. However, their rendered results from
different views often tend to be inconsistent as they do not
1
arXiv:2112.05637v3  [cs.CV]  30 Apr 2022


explicitly encode or model 3D geometry.
Recently, Mildenhall et al. [35] propose to represent
3D scenes using neural radiance ﬁelds (NeRF). This strat-
egy can synthesis photorealistic images and has emerged
as a compelling technique.
Compared with the above-
mentioned generative methods, the density ﬁeld from NeRF
actually implicitly encodes the 3D geometry of the scene.
Therefore, the results from NeRF have excellent multi-view
consistency.
In another opinion, NeRF itself can be re-
garded as a novel 3D representation equivalent to a textured
mesh and naturally supports differentiable rendering.
Based on this observation, we apply the NeRF struc-
ture to the representation of human heads and propose
a novel NeRF-based parametric head model, HeadNeRF.
HeadNeRF inherits the excellent properties of NeRF, which
can generate high ﬁdelity head images and maintain re-
markable multi-view consistency. Moreover, NeRF itself
supports freely changing the camera perspective used for
rendering, and thus HeadNeRF naturally supports the pose
editing of rendered images. It is challenging for the above-
mentioned 2D generative methods. In addition, HeadNeRF
intrinsically supports differentiable rendering. In contrast,
traditional 3D representations, such as mesh, point cloud,
voxel, etc., need to design various approximation meth-
ods [19, 23, 27, 28, 32] to alleviate the non-differentiable
problems of their rendering process. Therefore, compared
with the previous methods, which need to capture and pro-
cess a large amount of high-quality 3D scan data, the con-
struction of HeadNeRF only needs 2D images as input.
Speciﬁcally, we collect and process three large-scale human
head image datasets and design novel loss terms to disentan-
gle this parametric representation. With the well designed
network structure and loss function, HeadNeRF can seman-
tically disentangle the identity, expression, and appearance
of the rendered images. Fig. 1 shows some results by freely
exploring within the space of HeadNeRF.
We further integrate the volume rendering of NeRF with
2D neural rendering to achieve real-time rendering. Sim-
ilar with GIRAFFE [38] and StyleNeRF [16], this coarse
to ﬁne strategy signiﬁcantly accelerates the rendering speed
of HeadNeRF, and it can exceed 40fps without sacriﬁcing
the rendering quality. Beneﬁting from its nice disentangled
representation, real-time rendering of inference, and high
ﬁdelity generated results, we apply HeadNeRF to various
applications, including novel view synthesis from a single
face image, semantically editing face attributes, and even
facial reenactment where the expressions of one person are
transferred to another person. In summary, the main contri-
butions of this paper include:
• We propose the ﬁrst NeRF-based parametric human
head model, which can directly efﬁciently control the
rendering pose, identity, expression, and appearance.
• We propose an effective training strategy to train the
model from general 2D image datasets, and the trained
model can generate high ﬁdelity rendered images.
• We design and implement several novel applications
with HeadNeRF, and the results verify its effective-
ness. We believe that more interesting applications can
be explored with our HeadNeRF.
2. Related Work
Parametric Face/Head Model. As different people share
similar face shapes and appearances, human face can be
embedded into a low-dimensional parametric space. Based
on this observation, Blanz and Vetter [3] propose to build
3D morphable model (3DMM), which has been further im-
proved and widely used for 3D face representation [6, 11,
41, 51]. 3DMM decomposes the intrinsic attributes of the
face into identity, expression, and reﬂectance. They are en-
coded as low-dimensional vectors and can be used to restore
3D textured face mesh using corresponding blendshapes.
The scene illumination is often simultaneously modeled via
the spherical harmonics function [15]. Recently, some gen-
erative adversarial [21, 22] methods can directly generate
photorealistic face images without the aid of 3D modeling.
However, these methods pay more attention to generating
images that meet the speciﬁed distribution and lack seman-
tic and interpretable control over the image synthesis. Some
strategies, such as adding disentangled loss [9,26,49], em-
bedding the above-mentioned parametric face model into
generative adversarial network (GAN) [5, 14], etc., are
proposed to alleviate this problem.
However, these 2D
GAN methods essentially still lack an explicit 3D geometric
structure. Therefore, the rendering results tend to be incon-
sistent as the camera pose changes.
Neural Radiance Field. NeRF [35] represents 3D scenes
using an implicit MLP-based function and shows convinc-
ing rendering quality for the novel view synthesis task.
Meanwhile, the rendering process of NeRF is inherently
differentiable. Therefore, the training of NeRF can be com-
pleted only using multi-view images with camera param-
eters. Beneﬁting from these advantages, NeRF has been
widely used in many ﬁelds, such as 3D modeling [53, 58],
human face/body digitization [12,17,42,43,48,55], gener-
ating 4D free-view video [31,39], etc. Besides, many works
are proposed to further improve NeRF, including speeding
up training [1,2] and inference [13,18,44,56,59], improving
rendering quality [55], and reducing the number of required
inputs [8,60]. Please refer to [50] for a complete summary.
NeRF-Based GANs.
Some works [7, 16, 38, 45, 63] in-
tegrate NeRF with GANs to design 3D-aware generators.
Thanks to the introduction of NeRF structure, these meth-
ods generally can directly control the pose of synthesized
results and effectively improve the multi-view consistency
2


ℎ𝜃
x
Skip Connection
(𝜎, 𝐹)
ℎ𝜃
𝐼𝐹
toRGB
𝑅𝐺𝐵
𝐼𝐹
𝐼𝐹
𝐼𝐹
𝐼
Rendered Image
Ground Truth 
Loss:𝐿
Identity
Expression
Albedo
Illumination
𝑧exp
𝑧alb
𝑧ill
𝑧id
𝛾(x)
𝑧exp
𝑧id
𝑧alb
𝑧ill
Latent Codes
Volume Rendering
Implicit Function
𝜎
𝐹
toRGB
toRGB
toRGB
Leaky ReLu
toRGB
1x1 Conv2D:
𝐷,∗,∗→(3,∗,∗)
Bilinear 
Upsampling
1x1 Conv2D: 𝐷,∗,∗→(2𝐷,∗,∗)
Add Operator
P
K
P
PixelShuffle
1x1 Conv2D: 𝐷,∗,∗→(𝐷/2,∗,∗)
Repeat
K
Conv2D with a fixed blur kernel K
𝜋𝜓
Figure 2. Overview of HeadNeRF. Given semantic latent codes and camera parameters, the MLP-based implicit function hθ is utilized to
predict the density σ(x) and feature vector F(x) of the 3D point x sampled from one ray. Then we perform volume rendering to generate
a low-resolution feature map IF , which is further used to render the ﬁnal result I by our well-designed 2D neural rendering module πψ.
The whole process is differentiable, and thus the construction of HeadNeRF can be completed using only 2D images.
of generated images, which is challenging for 2D genera-
tive models [21,22]. Voxel-based GANs [36,37] can allevi-
ate this problem, but their generated results tend to lack ﬁne
details due to the voxel resolution restriction. GRAF [45] is
the ﬁrst to introduce the neural radiance ﬁeld into GAN. Al-
though the quality and 3D consistency of the rendering re-
sults can be improved by using this method, it still struggles
to render high-resolution and high-ﬁdelity images due to the
expensive rendering process of the neural radiance ﬁeld.
GIRAFFE [38] further improved the training and render-
ing efﬁciency by combining NeRF with a 2D CNN-based
neural renderer and can signiﬁcantly improve the computa-
tional speed of NeRF with a slight loss of accuracy. In ad-
dition, some works [7,16,63] attempt to design novel ways
of applying conditions to generate more ﬁne details.
3. Method
In this work, we propose HeadNeRF, a novel parametric
model integrating neural radiance ﬁeld to human head rep-
resentation. Unlike the previous 3D mesh-based topologi-
cally uniformed face parametric model [3,4,6,30,41,51,57],
HeadNeRF takes the accelerated variant of neural radiance
ﬁeld as a uniﬁed 3D proxy, which allows it to directly con-
trol the viewing pose of the rendered result and generate
high ﬁdelity head images in real-time on modern GPUs. To
train HeadNeRF, we collected and processed three large-
scale face image datasets. Meanwhile, the novel network
structure and loss terms are well designed such that the
trained parametric model can semantically control and edit
the rendering result’s identity, expression, and appearance.
3.1. Model Representation
HeadNeRF is a NeRF-based parametric model, denoted
as R, which can render an image I with speciﬁed attributes
for a given camera parameter and some semantic codes. It
is formulated as:
I = R(zid, zexp, zalb, zill, P),
(1)
where P is the camera parameter used for rendering, in-
cluding the extrinsic matrix and the intrinsic matrix. z∗rep-
resent the latent codes for four independent factors: iden-
tity zid, expression zexp, the albedo zalb of the face, and the
illumination zill of the scene.
3.2. Network Architecture
Similar to 3DMM, we consider that the underlying geo-
metric shape of the head image is mainly controlled by la-
tent codes related to identity and expression, and the latent
codes of albedo and illumination are responsible for the ap-
pearance of rendered heads. Therefore, the MLP-based im-
plicit function hθ of NeRF is adjusted as:
hθ : (γ(x), zid, zexp, zalb, zill) 7→(σ, F),
(2)
where θ represents the network parameters, and the net-
work architecture of the implicit function is shown in Fig. 2.
γ(∗) is the pre-deﬁned positional encoding from NeRF [35].
x ∈R3 is a 3D point sampled from one ray. Like previous
works [16, 38, 63], instead of directly predicting x’s RGB,
we predict a high-dimensional feature vector F(x) ∈R256
for the 3D sampling point x. Speciﬁcally, hθ takes as input
the concatenation of γ(x), zid, zexp and output the density
σ of x and an intermediate feature, the latter and zalb, zill
are used to further predict F(x). Thus, the prediction of the
density ﬁeld is mainly affected by the identity and expres-
sion code. The albedo and illumination codes only affect
the feature vector prediction, which is consistent with our
3


previous description. Similarly, we remove the viewing di-
rection to avoid capturing undesired inconsistencies caused
by dataset bias [16,63].
Then a low-resolution 2D feature map IF ∈R256×32×32
can be obtained by the following volume rendering strategy:
IF (r) =
Z ∞
0
w(t) · F(r(t))dt,
where
w(t) = exp(−
Z t
0
σ(r(s))ds) · σ(r(t)).
(3)
r(t) represents a ray emitted from the camera center.
Finally, we map IF to the ﬁnal predicted image I
∈
R3×256×256 with a 2D neural rendering module πψ, which
is mainly composed of 1x1 Conv2D and leaky ReLU [33]
activation layer to alleviate possible multi-view inconsistent
artifacts [16]. ψ denotes the learnable parameters. Similar
with the strategy used in StyleNeRF [16], the resolution of
IF is gradually increased through a series of upsampling
layers. The upsampling process can be formulated as:
Upsample(X) = Conv2D(Y, K)
Y = Pixelshufﬂe(repeat(X, 4) + βζ(X), 2),
(4)
where βζ : RD →R4D is a learnable 2-layer MLP, ζ
denotes the learnable weights, and K is a ﬁxed blur ker-
nel [62]. Like GIRAFFE [38], we map each feature tensor
to an RGB image and take the sum of all RGB as the ﬁnal
predicted image. The difference is that we use 1x1 convolu-
tion instead of 3x3 convolution to avoid possible multi-view
inconsistencies [16]. The network architecture of 2D neural
rendering module is shown in Fig. 2.
3.3. Latent Codes and Canonical Coordinate
To efﬁciently train HeadNeRF, we utilize the 3DMM
to initialize the latent codes of each image of our training
dataset. Speciﬁcally, we set the dimensionality of the latent
codes of HeadNeRF to be the same with the dimensionality
of the corresponding codes from 3DMM [51] and initial-
ize them by solving inverse rendering optimization [10,54]
based on the 3DMM model. Although the initial identity
code of 3DMM only describes the geometry of the face
area (without hair, teeth, etc.), it will be adaptively adjusted
through the backpropagation gradient of training.
On the other hand, the images used for building our
model come from different channels (See sec. 3.4). To sta-
bilize the training of HeadNeRF, we need to align each im-
age’s underlying geometry to a similar center before train-
ing.
To this end, for each image, we solve the above-
mentioned 3DMM parameter optimization to obtain its cor-
responding global rigid transformation T ∈R4×4, which
transforms the 3DMM geometry from 3DMM canonical co-
ordinate to camera coordinate. We further take this transfor-
mation as the camera extrinsic parameter of the image. This
…
…
…
…
…
…
…
…
…
…
Identity
Expression
Camera pose
Illumination
FaceSEIP
FaceScape
FFHQ
Figure 3. Some human head images used for training HeadNeRF.
strategy actually implicitly aligns the underlying geometry
of each image to the center of the 3DMM template mesh.
3.4. Datasets and Preprocessing
We collected and processed three datasets to train Head-
NeRF, and the details are described in the following.
FaceSEIP Dataset. This dataset includes 51 subjects with
different genders, ages, races, and illumination conditions.
These subjects are photographed in their daily dress-up and
asked to perform 25 speciﬁc expressions with 13 cameras
and 4 lighting conditions. This dataset contains 66300 face
images, and some instances are shown in Fig. 3. Besides,
the face mask is generated by the off-the-shelf segmenta-
tion methods [24, 61] and the images that fail to segment
foreground are manually removed.
FaceScape Dataset. This dataset is from FaceScape [57]
and contains 359 valid subjects. Each subject wears a hood
and is asked to perform 20 speciﬁc expressions. Since the
camera number of each subject is not ﬁxed, for the con-
venience of training, we select subjects with 10 common
perspectives from all subjects and ﬁlter out the rest. We
also adopt the above-mentioned strategy to generate the face
mask for each image. In the ﬁnal, it contains 124 valid sub-
jects, and some instances are shown in Fig. 3.
FFHQ Dataset. This dataset is from StyleGAN [22] and
contains 70000 high-resolution face images. The purpose
of using this dataset is to utilize various in-the-wild face
images to enhance the generalization ability of HeadNeRF.
We also apply the above segmentation strategy to generate
the segmentation mask and then manually select 4133 im-
ages with good masks. As shown in Fig. 9, this single-view
in-the-wild image dataset effectively improves the general-
ization ability of HeadNeRF.
3.5. Loss Function
All the above-mentioned images are used to train Head-
NeRF. The learnable variables include the latent codes of
each image and the shared network parameters of volume
4


rendering and neural rendering. The loss terms used to train
the model include the following three terms.
Photometric Loss. For each image, it is required that the
rendered result of the head area to be consistent with the
corresponding real image, this loss term is formulated as:
Ldata = ∥Mh ⊙(R(zid, zexp, zalb, zill, P) −IGT)∥2,
(5)
where R(zid, zexp, zalb, zill, P) is the rendered image, IGT is
the corresponding real image, Mh is the head mask and ⊙
indicates Hadamard product operator.
Perceptual Loss. Compared with the vanilla NeRF, Head-
NeRF can directly predict the color of all pixels in the ren-
dered image via one inference. Therefore, we adopt the per-
ceptual loss [20] in Eq. (6) to further improve the image
details of the rendered results.
Lper =
X
i
∥φi(R(zid, zexp, zalb, zill, P))−φi(IGT)∥2, (6)
where φi(∗) denotes the activation of the i-th layer in
VGG16 [46] network. As shown in Fig. 7, Lper can sig-
niﬁcantly improve the details of rendered results.
Disentangled Loss. In order to achieve semantically dis-
entangled control to the rendered results, we let all images
of one subject share the same identity latent code, and the
images of the same expression with different lighting condi-
tions and different captured cameras from the same subject
share the same expression latent code.
For the purpose of disentangled representation, differ-
ent subjects with similar expression should have similar ex-
pression codes. The initial expression codes generated by
the initialization method of Sec.3.3 satisfy this requirement
thanks to the introduction of 3DMM. Therefore, we require
that the learnable expression code cannot be far away from
the initial expression code. Other attributes are also con-
strained similarly. As 3DMM mainly models the face area
without hair, teeth, etc., we relax this constraint for these
non-expression attributes. Accordingly, the loss term for
disentanglement is designed as:
Ldis =wid∥zid −z0
id∥2 + wexp∥zexp −z0
exp∥2+
walb∥zalb −z0
alb∥2 + will∥zill −z0
ill∥2,
(7)
where z∗is the learnable latent code and z0
∗is the initial
latent code from the 3DMM model.
In summary, the overall loss of HeadNeRF is deﬁned as:
L = Ldata + Lper + Ldis.
(8)
4. Experiments
4.1. Implementation Details
We implement HeadNeRF with Pytorch [40] and the
learnable parameters are updated using Adam solver [25] on
FaceSEIP
FaceScape
FFHQ
Figure 4. Disentangled control on camera pose. HeadNeRF can
directly control the generated images’ rendering view and synthe-
size high ﬁdelity rendered results with excellent multi-view con-
sistency.
(a) Adjusting camera’s position from near to far.
(b) Adjusting camera’s FoV from small to large.
Figure 5. Adjusting camera’s position and FoV.
3 NVIDIA 3090 GPUs. The sizes of different latent codes
are zid ∈R100, zexp ∈R79, zalb ∈R100, and zill ∈R27
respectively. In the volume rendering process, 64 points are
sampled for each ray. In addition, we remove the hierar-
chical volume sampling of NeRF to further speed up infer-
ence. As a result, our HeadNeRF is able to render one head
image more than 40fps without any other speciﬁc accelera-
tion or optimization. The loss weights in Eq. (7) are set to
wid = walb = will = 0.001, wexp = 0.1.
4.2. Evaluations
Disentangled Control. In this part, we test HeadNeRF’s
ability to independently control various semantic attributes
of rendered results.
First, we train HeadNeRF with the
datasets mentioned in Sec. 3.4. As shown in Fig. 4, 5, for
a given combination of latent codes (zid, zexp, zalb, zill), we
can directly adjust the camera parameters to continuously
change the rendering view or edit the camera’s position and
FoV (Field of View). These rendering results have excellent
multi-view consistency and illustrate that our well-designed
2D neural rendering module effectively preserves the geo-
metric structure implicitly encoded by original NeRF.
Furthermore, we can utilize HeadNeRF to directly edit
semantic attributes of rendered results. As shown in Fig. 6,
we ﬁrst sample several combinations of latent codes and
render their corresponding frontal face images. Then two
latent codes describing the same attribute are selected and
the intermediate latent code can be obtained by performing
linear interpolation on them. Finally, we update the interpo-
5


Identity
Appearance Expression
Figure 6. Disentangle facial attributes. HeadNeRF can indepen-
dently edit the speciﬁc attributes of the rendered result by per-
forming linear interpolating on the latent codes of the speciﬁed
attributes.
lation results to the relevant attributes and use HeadNeRF
to re-render the head image. As shown in this ﬁgure, Head-
NeRF can maintain the remaining semantic attributes when
editing a speciﬁc attribute, which veriﬁes that HeadNeRF
effectively disentangles different facial attributes.
Ablation Study on the Perceptual Loss. We attempt to re-
move the perceptual loss from the total loss, and record the
corresponding trained model as HeadNeRF-noPerc. Then,
for a given image in the training dataset, we use the trained
HeadNeRF and HeadNeRF-noPerc to generate their predic-
tion results respectively. As shown in Fig. 7, it can be found
that the perceptual loss does effectively enhance the ﬁne-
level details of the generated results.
Ablation Study on 2D Neural Rendering.
To further
verify the effectiveness of 2D neural rendering module in
HeadNeRF, we design the following baseline version. All
the latent codes, viewing direction and hierarchical sam-
pling are kept except the 2D neural rendering module, and
we denote this baseline as HeadNeRF-vanilla. Noting that
the baseline can only be trained using the way of sampling
batch rays due to the expensive rendering process of NeRF.
Thus, the perceptual loss is not available to the HeadNeRF-
vanilla. For a fair comparison, our HeadNeRF also removes
the perceptual loss. Then, we use FaceSEIP dataset (See
sec. 3.4) to train HeadNeRF-vanilla and HeadNeRF, respec-
tively. HeadNeRF-vanilla is trained about 7 days with 3
NVIDIA 3090 GPUs, and HeadNeRF is trained about 3
days with a single NVIDIA 3090 GPU. As shown in Fig. 8,
the results of HeadNeRF-vanilla tend to be blurred, which
may be caused by its inefﬁcient training. In contrast, thanks
to the effectiveness and efﬁciency endowed by the neu-
ral rendering module, HeadNeRF can use much less train-
ing time while achieving better rendered result.
Mean-
while, HeadNeRF-vanilla takes ∼5s to render a frame im-
age, while HeadNeRF can render the result in real-time .
Ablation Study on Using FFHQ Dataset.
To verify the
importance of FFHQ dataset, we train two parametric mod-
els for comparison, where one is only trained with Face-
SEIP dataset and the other is trained with FaceSEIP and
FFHQ dataset. Next, the network parameters of the two
models are ﬁxed, and we further generate the latent codes
Ground Truth
w/o Perceptual Loss
w/ Perceptual Loss
Figure 7. Ablation study on perceptual loss. The perceptual loss
effectively enhances the ﬁne-level details(wrinkle in red area and
beard in green area) of the generated results.
Ground Truth HeadNeRF
-vanilla
HeadNeRF
w/o Lper
Ground Truth HeadNeRF
-vanilla
HeadNeRF
w/o Lper
Figure 8. Ablation study on 2D neural rendering. Due to the effec-
tiveness and efﬁciency endowed by the 2D neural rendering mod-
ule, HeadNeRF can use much less training time while achieving
better rendered results.
embedding of the selected image that does not participate
in training by minimizing the objective function Eq. (8).
The corresponding rendering results of the optimized latent
codes are shown in Fig. 9. It can be found that the introduc-
tion of FFHQ dataset signiﬁcantly promotes the generaliza-
tion ability of HeadNeRF. It is worth noting that we can fur-
ther semantically modify the speciﬁed attributes of the op-
timization result based on our HeadNeRF, such as adjusting
the rendering pose and changing the expression, etc. Mean-
while, the driven results are plausible and maintain excel-
lent multi-view consistency. It shows that our HeadNeRF
has successfully learned the statistical priors of human head
from FaceSEIP dataset so that reasonable semantic editing
results can be generated. In summary, the datasets used in
our model training are complementary and effectively im-
prove the representation ability of HeadNeRF.
4.3. Comparisons
Qualitative Comparison.
Fig. 10 shows the qualitative
comparison between HeadNeRF and some related state-of-
the-art methods. Each method generates several face im-
ages with different camera poses according to their sampled
noise code. Among them, pi-GAN [7], GRAF [45] and
GIRAFFE [38] are the generative models based on NeRF
structure. It can be observed that the generated results of
GRAF have obviously inconsistent artifacts, which may be
caused by GRAF’s inability to globally enforce the render-
ing results to meet the speciﬁed data distribution. Although
6


Input
w/o FFHQ
w/ FFHQ
Yaw
Pitch
Identity
Expression
Albedo
Illumination
Fitting
Editing
Figure 9. Ablation study on using FFHQ dataset. The introduction of FFHQ dataset signiﬁcantly improves the generalization ability of
HeadNeRF. Based on HeadNeRF, we can modify the speciﬁed attributes of the optimization result only with one single image as input,
such as adjusting the rendering pose and changing the identity, expression and appearance of the rendered result.
GRAF [45]
pi-GAN [7]
GIRAFFE [38]
DiscoFaceGAN [9]
VariTex [5]
Ours
Figure 10. Qualitative comparison with state-of-the-art methods.
The undesired or inconsistent parts of other methods are marked
with rectangles.
the images generated by pi-GAN improve visual consis-
tency, they still lack details.
Because of the use of dis-
criminant loss and the pure NeRF structure, pi-GAN can-
not be trained at high resolution. GIRAFFE also designs a
2D neural rendering module to accelerate the rendering pro-
cess. However, as shown in this ﬁgure, GIRAFFE doesn’t
get rid of the problem of multi-view inconsistency, which
may be caused by the 3x3 CNN in GIRAFFE damaging the
3D information encoded by the NeRF.
It needs to be pointed out that these methods are designed
for general objects, and they cannot be used to semanti-
cally edit and control various attributes of the generated re-
sults. Some other methods like VariTex [5] and DiscoFace-
GAN [9] attempt to integrate the priors from 3DMM into
2D generative models, but their rendering results still suf-
fer from multi-view inconsistencies due to the limited rep-
resentation ability of 3DMM. In contrast, HeadNeRF can
efﬁciently generate high ﬁdelity images while maintaining
excellent multi-view consistency.
Quantitative Comparison.
Currently, the PSNR (Peak
Signal-to-Noise
Ratio)
of
HeadNeRF
on
FaceSEIP,
FaceScape, and FFHQ datasets are 29.8, 30.6, and 23.3, re-
CelebAMask-HQ
FFHQ
Method
L1 ↓
PSNR ↑
SSIM ↑
L1 ↓
PSNR ↑
SSIM ↑
pi-GAN [7]
0.543
24.8
0.799
0.483
24.9
0.810
GIRAFFE [38]
0.420
20.6
0.628
0.428
20.3
0.635
Ours
0.306
19.6
0.702
0.344
21.6
0.755
Table 1. Quantitative comparison with state-of-the-art generative
adversarial models based on NeRF structure. Some metrics about
ﬁtting a single image are calculated.
Input
pi-GAN [7]
GIRAFFE [38]
Ours
Figure 11. Fitting results of different methods. The ﬁgure with red
box is the ﬁtting result, and others are generated by changing the
rendering pose of the ﬁtting result.
spectively. To further quantitatively evaluate the effective-
ness of HeadNeRF, we randomly select 400 in-the-wild face
images from the CeleAMask-HQ dataset [29] and the test
dataset of FFHQ [21], respectively. These images are used
as the evaluation dataset and did not participate in the train-
ing of HeadNeRF at all. For each image in the evaluation
dataset, the ﬁtting results of pi-GAN [7], GIRAFFE [38]
and our HeadNeRF are obtained by solving the inverse ren-
dering optimization. For pi-GAN, the ofﬁcial ﬁtting code
and pre-training model are used. For GIRAFFE, we use
the ofﬁcial pre-trained model, and the ﬁtting code is im-
plemented by ourselves. Then, the mean L1 distance, the
PSNR, and the SSIM (Structure Similarity Index) is calcu-
lated between the input image and ﬁtting results. The sta-
tistical results are shown in Tab. 1.
Although the PSNR and SSIM of pi-GAN are optimal,
we ﬁnd that the ﬁtting results of pi-GAN are often prone to
overﬁtting. As shown in Fig. 11, the ﬁtting result of pi-GAN
is indeed visually optimal. However, if we edit and change
the rendering pose of the ﬁtting result, the rendered results
often become blurred and damaged. On the other hand, GI-
RAFFE can generate plausible rendered results when we
change the rendering pose of GIRAFFE’s ﬁtting result, but
the multi-view consistency of the rendered results is unde-
7


The Reference
Video
The Target Image
Figure 12. Expression Transfer. HeadNeRF is used to transfer facial expressions from the reference video to the persons in target images.
sired. Compared with GIRAFFE, HeadNeRF has higher
ﬁtting accuracy and can maintain better multi-view consis-
tency. Please note that our HeadNeRF can further mod-
ify and edit other semantic attributes, including identity, ex-
pression and appearance. As shown in Fig. 9.
4.4. Application: Expression Transfer
As HeadNeRF has strong representation ability and can
disentangle various attributes of the rendered result, it can
be used for many applications such as novel-view synthe-
sis, style mixing, etc,. In this part, we utilize HeadNeRF to
perform expression transfer, i,e., transfer the facial expres-
sions from the reference video to the people in target pic-
ture. To this end, we only need to extract the latent codes
of all images from the reference video and the target image,
and replace the expression latent code of the target image
with the expression latent codes from the reference video.
Finally, the trained HeadNeRF is employed to generate the
desired face image sequence where the characters in the tar-
get image are driven to make expressions from the reference
video. The qualitative results are shown in Fig. 12.
5. Limitation and Future Work
There still exist some limitations in HeadNeRF. Al-
though images from FFHQ dataset are added to enhance
the representation ability of HeadNeRF, the current training
dataset is still not enough to cover various cases. For images
that are quite different from our training data, HeadNeRF
can only return similar results for the ﬁtting task. As the
examples shown in Fig. 13, because our training data rarely
involves images with headgear, it is difﬁcult to render the
content of the headgear in the ﬁtting results of HeadNeRF.
In the future, we consider using a large amount of in-the-
wild face image data to further enhance the representation
ability of HeadNeRF in a self-supervised manner.
The current training dataset only contains four types of
illuminations in our multi-view dataset (FaceSEIP), which
is insufﬁcient for the coverage of illumination types. There-
fore, when we edit the illumination attribute, the change
…
…
(a) Input
Fitting (b) Continuously change the illumination latent code
Figure 13. Failure results of ﬁtting and re-illumination.
of image shading is not like a continuous movement of the
light source position. In the future, we can consider adding
data captured by the light stage to alleviate this problem.
6. Conclusion
In this paper, we proposed HeadNeRF, a novel NeRF-
based parametric head model that integrates neural radiance
ﬁeld to parametric human head representation. Thanks to
our well-designed network module and loss terms, Head-
NeRF can render high ﬁdelity head images in real-time
on modern GPUs and support directly controlling the pose
of rendered images and independently editing the iden-
tity, expression, and appearance of generated images. Ex-
tensive experimental results have demonstrated that Head-
NeRF outperforms state-of-the-art related models. We be-
lieve that HeadNeRF has taken a signiﬁcant step toward the
realistic digital human.
Ethic discussion. Misuse of our methods may raise ethical
issues, and the corresponding wrongdoing should be strictly
prohibited. Therefore, we require that the media data gen-
erated by our method clearly presents itself as synthetic.
Moreover, we strictly prohibit using our method to infringe
rights, spread misinformation, tarnish reputations, etc.
Acknowledgements. This research was supported by the
National Key R&D Program of China (2020YFC1523102),
the
National
Natural
Science
Foundation
of
China
(No.62122071, 62025207), the Youth Innovation Promo-
tion Association CAS (No.
2018495) and the Funda-
mental Research Funds for the Central Universities (No.
WK3470000021).
8


References
[1] Jonathan T Barron, Ben Mildenhall, Matthew Tancik, Peter
Hedman, Ricardo Martin-Brualla, and Pratul P Srinivasan.
Mip-nerf: A multiscale representation for anti-aliasing neu-
ral radiance ﬁelds. In IEEE/CVF International Conference
on Computer Vision, 2021. 2
[2] Alexander W Bergman, Petr Kellnhofer, and Gordon Wet-
zstein. Fast training of neural lumigraph representations us-
ing meta learning. In Advances in Neural Information Pro-
cessing Systems, 2021. 2
[3] Volker Blanz and Thomas Vetter. A morphable model for
the synthesis of 3d faces. In Proceedings of the 26th an-
nual conference on Computer graphics and interactive tech-
niques, pages 187–194, 1999. 1, 2, 3
[4] James Booth, Anastasios Roussos, Allan Ponniah, David
Dunaway, and Stefanos Zafeiriou.
Large scale 3d mor-
phable models. International Journal of Computer Vision,
126(2):233–254, 2018. 3
[5] Marcel C B¨uhler, Abhimitra Meka, Gengyan Li, Thabo
Beeler, and Otmar Hilliges. Varitex: Variational neural face
textures. In IEEE/CVF International Conference on Com-
puter Vision, 2021. 1, 2, 7
[6] Chen Cao, Yanlin Weng, Shun Zhou, Yiying Tong, and Kun
Zhou. Facewarehouse: A 3d facial expression database for
visual computing. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and
Computer Graphics, 20(3):413–425, 2013. 1, 2, 3
[7] Eric R Chan, Marco Monteiro, Petr Kellnhofer, Jiajun Wu,
and Gordon Wetzstein.
pi-gan: Periodic implicit gener-
ative adversarial networks for 3d-aware image synthesis.
In IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, pages 5799–5809, 2021. 2, 3, 6, 7
[8] Julian Chibane, Aayush Bansal, Verica Lazova, and Gerard
Pons-Moll. Stereo radiance ﬁelds (srf): Learning view syn-
thesis for sparse views of novel scenes. In IEEE/CVF Con-
ference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages
7911–7920, 2021. 2
[9] Yu Deng, Jiaolong Yang, Dong Chen, Fang Wen, and Xin
Tong. Disentangled and controllable face image generation
via 3d imitative-contrastive learning.
In IEEE/CVF Con-
ference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages
5154–5163, 2020. 1, 2, 7
[10] Yu Deng, Jiaolong Yang, Sicheng Xu, Dong Chen, Yunde
Jia, and Xin Tong.
Accurate 3d face reconstruction with
weakly-supervised learning: From single image to image set.
In IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition Workshops, pages 0–0, 2019. 4
[11] Bernhard Egger, William AP Smith, Ayush Tewari, Stefanie
Wuhrer, Michael Zollhoefer, Thabo Beeler, Florian Bernard,
Timo Bolkart, Adam Kortylewski, Sami Romdhani, et al.
3d morphable face models—past, present, and future. ACM
Transactions on Graphics (TOG), 39(5):1–38, 2020. 1, 2
[12] Guy Gafni, Justus Thies, Michael Zollhofer, and Matthias
Nießner.
Dynamic neural radiance ﬁelds for monocular
4d facial avatar reconstruction.
In IEEE/CVF Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 8649–
8658, 2021. 2
[13] Stephan J Garbin, Marek Kowalski, Matthew Johnson, Jamie
Shotton, and Julien Valentin. Fastnerf: High-ﬁdelity neural
rendering at 200fps. In IEEE/CVF International Conference
on Computer Vision, 2021. 2
[14] Partha Ghosh, Pravir Singh Gupta, Roy Uziel, Anurag Ran-
jan, Michael J Black, and Timo Bolkart. Gif: Generative in-
terpretable faces. In International Conference on 3D Vision
(3DV), pages 868–878, 2020. 1, 2
[15] Robin Green. Spherical harmonic lighting: The gritty details.
In Archives of the game developers conference, volume 56,
page 4, 2003. 2
[16] Jiatao Gu, Lingjie Liu, Peng Wang, and Christian Theobalt.
Stylenerf:
A style-based 3d aware generator for high-
resolution image synthesis. In International Conference on
Learning Representations, 2022. 2, 3, 4
[17] Yudong Guo, Keyu Chen, Sen Liang, Yongjin Liu, Hujun
Bao, and Juyong Zhang. Ad-nerf: Audio driven neural ra-
diance ﬁelds for talking head synthesis. In IEEE/CVF IEEE
Conference on Computer Vision, 2021. 2
[18] Peter Hedman,
Pratul P Srinivasan,
Ben Mildenhall,
Jonathan T Barron, and Paul Debevec. Baking neural ra-
diance ﬁelds for real-time view synthesis. In IEEE/CVF In-
ternational Conference on Computer Vision, 2021. 2
[19] Yue Jiang, Dantong Ji, Zhizhong Han, and Matthias Zwicker.
Sdfdiff: Differentiable rendering of signed distance ﬁelds for
3d shape optimization. In IEEE/CVF Conference on Com-
puter Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 1251–1261,
2020. 2
[20] Justin Johnson, Alexandre Alahi, and Li Fei-Fei. Perceptual
losses for real-time style transfer and super-resolution. In
European conference on computer vision, pages 694–711.
Springer, 2016. 5
[21] Tero Karras, Samuli Laine, and Timo Aila. A style-based
generator architecture for generative adversarial networks.
In IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, pages 4401–4410, 2019. 1, 2, 3, 7
[22] Tero Karras, Samuli Laine, Miika Aittala, Janne Hellsten,
Jaakko Lehtinen, and Timo Aila.
Analyzing and improv-
ing the image quality of stylegan. In IEEE/CVF Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 8110–
8119, 2020. 1, 2, 3, 4
[23] Hiroharu Kato, Yoshitaka Ushiku, and Tatsuya Harada. Neu-
ral 3d mesh renderer. In IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 3907–3916, 2018. 2
[24] Zhanghan Ke, Jiayu Sun, Kaican Li, Qiong Yan, and Ryn-
son W.H. Lau. Modnet: Real-time trimap-free portrait mat-
ting via objective decomposition. In AAAI, 2022. 4
[25] Diederik P. Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for
stochastic optimization. In Yoshua Bengio and Yann LeCun,
editors, International Conference on Learning Representa-
tions (ICLR), 2015. 5
[26] Marek Kowalski, Stephan J. Garbin, Virginia Estellers,
Tadas Baltruˇsaitis, Matthew Johnson, and Jamie Shotton.
Conﬁg: Controllable neural face image generation. In Eu-
ropean Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV), 2020. 1,
2
[27] Samuli Laine, Janne Hellsten, Tero Karras, Yeongho Seol,
Jaakko Lehtinen, and Timo Aila.
Modular primitives for
9


high-performance differentiable rendering. ACM Transac-
tions on Graphics, 39(6), 2020. 2
[28] Christoph Lassner and Michael Zollhofer. Pulsar: Efﬁcient
sphere-based neural rendering.
In IEEE/CVF Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 1440–
1449, 2021. 2
[29] Cheng-Han Lee, Ziwei Liu, Lingyun Wu, and Ping Luo.
Maskgan: Towards diverse and interactive facial image ma-
nipulation. In IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pat-
tern Recognition (CVPR), 2020. 7
[30] Tianye Li, Timo Bolkart, Michael J Black, Hao Li, and Javier
Romero. Learning a model of facial shape and expression
from 4d scans. ACM Trans. Graph., 36(6):194–1, 2017. 1, 3
[31] Tianye Li, Mira Slavcheva, Michael Zollhoefer, Simon
Green, Christoph Lassner, Changil Kim, Tanner Schmidt,
Steven Lovegrove, Michael Goesele, and Zhaoyang Lv. Neu-
ral 3d video synthesis.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.02597,
2021. 2
[32] Shichen Liu, Tianye Li, Weikai Chen, and Hao Li. Soft ras-
terizer: A differentiable renderer for image-based 3d reason-
ing. In IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer
Vision, pages 7708–7717, 2019. 2
[33] Andrew L. Maas, Awni Y. Hannun, and Andrew Y. Ng. Rec-
tiﬁer nonlinearities improve neural network acoustic models.
In in ICML Workshop on Deep Learning for Audio, Speech
and Language Processing, 2013. 4
[34] Iacopo Masi, Yue Wu, Tal Hassner, and Prem Natarajan.
Deep face recognition: A survey. In SIBGRAPI conference
on graphics, patterns and images (SIBGRAPI), pages 471–
478. IEEE, 2018. 1
[35] Ben Mildenhall, Pratul P Srinivasan, Matthew Tancik,
Jonathan T Barron, Ravi Ramamoorthi, and Ren Ng. Nerf:
Representing scenes as neural radiance ﬁelds for view syn-
thesis. In European Conference on Computer Vision, pages
405–421. Springer, 2020. 2, 3
[36] Thu Nguyen-Phuoc, Chuan Li, Lucas Theis, Christian
Richardt, and Yong-Liang Yang.
Hologan: Unsupervised
learning of 3d representations from natural images.
In
IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision,
pages 7588–7597, 2019. 1, 3
[37] Thu Nguyen-Phuoc, Christian Richardt, Long Mai, Yong-
Liang Yang, and Niloy J. Mitra.
Blockgan:
Learning
3d object-aware scene representations from unlabelled im-
ages. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
(NeurIPS), 2020. 3
[38] Michael Niemeyer and Andreas Geiger. Giraffe: Represent-
ing scenes as compositional generative neural feature ﬁelds.
In IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, pages 11453–11464, 2021. 2, 3, 4, 6, 7
[39] Keunhong Park, Utkarsh Sinha, Peter Hedman, Jonathan T.
Barron, Soﬁen Bouaziz, Dan B Goldman, Ricardo Martin-
Brualla, and Steven M. Seitz.
Hypernerf:
A higher-
dimensional representation for topologically varying neural
radiance ﬁelds. ACM Transactions on Graphics, 2021. 2
[40] Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam Lerer,
James Bradbury, Gregory Chanan, Trevor Killeen, Zeming
Lin, Natalia Gimelshein, Luca Antiga, et al. Pytorch: An
imperative style, high-performance deep learning library. In
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2019.
5
[41] Pascal Paysan, Reinhard Knothe, Brian Amberg, Sami
Romdhani, and Thomas Vetter. A 3d face model for pose
and illumination invariant face recognition. In IEEE inter-
national conference on advanced video and signal based
surveillance, pages 296–301. Ieee, 2009. 1, 2, 3
[42] Sida Peng, Yuanqing Zhang, Yinghao Xu, Qianqian Wang,
Qing Shuai, Hujun Bao, and Xiaowei Zhou. Neural body:
Implicit neural representations with structured latent codes
for novel view synthesis of dynamic humans. In IEEE/CVF
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
pages 9054–9063, 2021. 2
[43] Amit Raj, Michael Zollh¨ofer, Tomas Simon, Jason M.
Saragih, Shunsuke Saito, James Hays, and Stephen Lom-
bardi.
Pixel-aligned volumetric avatars.
In IEEE/CVF
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
(CVPR), pages 11733–11742, 2021. 2
[44] Christian Reiser, Songyou Peng, Yiyi Liao, and Andreas
Geiger. Kilonerf: Speeding up neural radiance ﬁelds with
thousands of tiny mlps. In IEEE/CVF International Confer-
ence on Computer Vision, 2021. 2
[45] Katja Schwarz, Yiyi Liao, Michael Niemeyer, and Andreas
Geiger. GRAF: generative radiance ﬁelds for 3d-aware im-
age synthesis. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems (NeurIPS), 2020. 2, 3, 6, 7
[46] Karen Simonyan and Andrew Zisserman. Very deep con-
volutional networks for large-scale image recognition. In In-
ternational Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR),
2015. 5
[47] Steven L Song, Weiqi Shi, and Michael Reed. Accurate face
rig approximation with deep differential subspace recon-
struction. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG), 39(4):34–
1, 2020. 1
[48] Shih-Yang Su, Frank Yu, Michael Zollhoefer, and Helge
Rhodin. A-nerf: Surface-free human 3d pose reﬁnement via
neural rendering. In Advances in Neural Information Pro-
cessing Systems, 2021. 2
[49] Ayush Tewari, Mohamed Elgharib, Gaurav Bharaj, Florian
Bernard, Hans-Peter Seidel, Patrick P´erez, Michael Zoll-
hofer, and Christian Theobalt. Stylerig: Rigging stylegan for
3d control over portrait images. In IEEE/CVF Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 6142–
6151, 2020. 2
[50] Ayush Tewari, Justus Thies, Ben Mildenhall, Pratul Srini-
vasan, Edgar Tretschk, Yifan Wang, Christoph Lassner,
Vincent Sitzmann, Ricardo Martin-Brualla, Stephen Lom-
bardi, Tomas Simon, Christian Theobalt, Matthias Niessner,
Jonathan T. Barron, Gordon Wetzstein anad Michael Zoll-
hoefer, and Vladislav Golyanik. Advances in neural render-
ing, 2021. 2
[51] Luan Tran and Xiaoming Liu. Nonlinear 3d face morphable
model. In IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition, pages 7346–7355, 2018. 2, 3, 4
[52] Mei Wang and Weihong Deng. Deep face recognition: A
survey. Neurocomputing, 429:215–244, 2021. 1
10
