Title: EVA3D: Compositional 3D Human Generation from 2D Image Collections

Position: Levels of AGI for Operationalizing Progress on the Path to AGI
Meredith Ringel Morris 1 Jascha Sohl-Dickstein 2 Noah Fiedel 2 Tris Wartkentin 2 Allan Dafoe 3
Aleksandra Faust 2 Clement Farbaret 3 Shane Legg 3
Abstract
We propose a framework for classifying the ca-
pabilities and behavior of Artificial General Intel-
ligence (AGI) models and their precursors. This
framework introduces levels of AGI performance,
generality, and autonomy, providing a common
language to compare models, assess risks, and
measure progress along the path to AGI. To de-
velop our framework, we analyze existing defini-
tions of AGI, and distill six principles that a useful
ontology for AGI should satisfy. With these prin-
ciples in mind, we propose “Levels of AGI” based
on depth (performance) and breadth (generality)
of capabilities, and reflect on how current systems
fit into this ontology. We discuss the challenging
requirements for future benchmarks that quan-
tify the behavior and capabilities of AGI models
against these levels. Finally, we discuss how these
levels of AGI interact with deployment considera-
tions such as autonomy and risk, and emphasize
the importance of carefully selecting Human-AI
Interaction paradigms for responsible and safe
deployment of highly capable AI systems.
1. Introduction
Artificial General Intelligence (AGI) is an important and
sometimes controversial concept in computing research,
used to describe an AI system that is at least as capable as a
human at most tasks. Given the rapid advancement of Ma-
chine Learning (ML) models, the concept of AGI has grown
from a subject of philosophical debate, to one which also
has near-term practical relevance. Some experts believe that
“sparks” of AGI (Bubeck et al., 2023) are already present
in the latest generation of large language models (LLMs);
some predict AI will broadly outperform humans within
1Google DeepMind, Seattle, WA, USA 2Google DeepMind,
Mountain View, CA, USA 3Google DeepMind, London, UK. Cor-
respondence to: Meredith Ringel Morris <merrie@google.com>.
Proceedings of the 41 st International Conference on Machine
Learning, Vienna, Austria. PMLR 235, 2024. Copyright 2024 by
the author(s).
about a decade (Bengio et al., 2023); some even assert that
current LLMs are AGIs (Ag¨uera y Arcas & Norvig, 2023).
The concept of AGI is important as it maps onto goals for,
predictions about, and risks of AI:
Goals: Achieving human-level “intelligence” is an implicit
or explicit north-star goal for many in our field, from the
1956 Dartmouth AI Conference (McCarthy et al., 1955)
that kick-started the modern field of AI, to today’s leading
AI research firms, whose mission statements include goals
such as “ensure transformative AI helps people and soci-
ety” (Anthropic, 2023a) and “ensure that artificial general
intelligence benefits all of humanity” (OpenAI, 2023).
Predictions: The concept of AGI is related to a predic-
tion about progress in AI, namely that it is toward greater
generality, approaching and exceeding human generality.
Additionally, AGI is typically intertwined with a notion
of “emergent” properties (Wei et al., 2022), i.e. capabili-
ties not explicitly anticipated by the developer. Such capa-
bilities offer promise, perhaps including abilities that are
complementary to typical human skills, enabling new types
of interaction or novel industries. Such predictions about
AGI’s capabilities in turn predict likely societal impacts;
AGI may have significant economic implications, i.e., reach-
ing the necessary criteria for widespread labor substitution
(Ellingrud et al., 2023; Dell’Acqua et al., 2023; Eloundou
et al., 2023), as well as geo-political implications relating
not only to the economic advantages AGI may confer, but
also to military considerations (Kissinger et al., 2022).
Risks: Lastly, AGI is viewed by some as a concept for iden-
tifying the point when there are extreme risks (Shevlane
et al., 2023; Bengio et al., 2023), as some speculate that
AGI systems might be able to deceive and manipulate, accu-
mulate resources, advance goals, behave agentically, outwit
humans in broad domains, displace humans from key roles,
and/or recursively self-improve.
In this position paper, we argue that it is critical for the
AI research community to explicitly reflect on what we
mean by “AGI,” and aspire to quantify attributes like the
performance, generality, and autonomy of AI systems.
Shared operationalizable definitions for these concepts will
support: comparisons between models; risk assessments
1
arXiv:2311.02462v5  [cs.AI]  24 Sep 2025


Levels of AGI
and mitigation strategies; clear criteria from policymakers
and regulators; identifying goals, predictions, and risks for
research and development; and the ability to understand and
communicate where we are along the path to AGI.
2. Defining AGI: Case Studies
Many AI researchers and organizations have proposed def-
initions of AGI. In this section, we consider nine promi-
nent examples, and reflect on their strengths and limitations.
This analysis informs our subsequent introduction of a two-
dimensional, leveled ontology of AGI.
Case Study 1: The Turing Test. The Turing Test (Turing,
1950) is perhaps the most well-known attempt to opera-
tionalize an AGI-like concept. Turing’s “imitation game”
attempts to operationalize the question of whether machines
can think, and asks a human to interactively distinguish
whether text is produced by another human or by a ma-
chine. The test as originally framed is a thought experiment,
and is the subject of many critiques (Wikipedia, 2023b); in
practice, the test often highlights the ease of fooling people
(Weizenbaum, 1966; Wikipedia, 2023a) rather than the “in-
telligence” of the machine. Given that modern LLMs pass
some framings of the Turing Test, it seems clear that this
criteria is insufficient for operationalizing or benchmarking
AGI. We agree with Turing that whether a machine can
think, while an interesting philosophical and scientific ques-
tion, seems orthogonal to the question of what the machine
can do; the latter is much more straightforward to measure
and more important for evaluating impacts. Therefore we
propose that AGI should be defined in terms of capabilities
rather than processes1.
Case Study 2: Strong AI – Systems Possessing Conscious-
ness. Philosopher John Searle mused, “according to strong
AI, the computer is not merely a tool in the study of the
mind; rather, the appropriately programmed computer re-
ally is a mind, in the sense that computers given the right
programs can be literally said to understand and have other
cognitive states” (Searle, 1980). While strong AI might be
one path to achieving AGI, there is no scientific consen-
sus on methods for determining whether machines possess
strong AI attributes such as consciousness (Butlin et al.,
2023), making this process-oriented framing impractical.
Case Study 3: Analogies to the Human Brain. The origi-
nal use of the term “artificial general intelligence” was in
a 1997 article about military technologies by Mark Gubrud
(Gubrud, 1997), which defined AGI as “AI systems that rival
or surpass the human brain in complexity and speed, that
can acquire, manipulate and reason with general knowledge,
1As research into mechanistic interpretability (R¨auker et al.,
2023) advances, it may enable process-oriented metrics. These
may be relevant to future definitions of AGI.
and that are usable in essentially any phase of industrial or
military operations where a human intelligence would other-
wise be needed.” This early definition emphasizes processes
(rivaling the human brain in complexity) in addition to capa-
bilities; while neural network architectures underlying mod-
ern ML systems are loosely inspired by the human brain,
the success of transformer-based architectures (Vaswani
et al., 2023) whose performance is not reliant on human-
like learning suggests that strict brain-based processes and
benchmarks are not inherently necessary for AGI.
Case Study 4: Human-Level Performance on Cognitive
Tasks. Legg (Legg, 2008) and Goertzel (Goertzel, 2014)
popularized the term AGI among computer scientists in
2001 (Legg, 2022), describing AGI as a machine that is able
to do the cognitive tasks that people can typically do. This
definition notably focuses on non-physical tasks (i.e., not
requiring robotic embodiment as a precursor to AGI). Like
many definitions of AGI, this framing presents ambiguity
around choices such as “what tasks?” and “which people?”.
Case Study 5: Ability to Learn Tasks. In The Technologi-
cal Singularity (Shanahan, 2015), Shanahan suggests that
AGI is “artificial intelligence that is not specialized to carry
out specific tasks, but can learn to perform as broad a range
of tasks as a human.” An important property of this framing
is its inclusion of metacognitive capabilities (learning) as a
requirement for AGI.
Case Study 6: Economically Valuable Work. OpenAI’s
charter defines AGI as “highly autonomous systems that
outperform humans at most economically valuable work”
(OpenAI, 2018). This definition has strengths per the “capa-
bilities, not processes” criteria, as it focuses on performance
agnostic to underlying mechanisms; further, this definition
offers a potential yardstick for measurement, i.e., economic
value. A shortcoming of this definition is that it does not
capture all of the criteria that may be part of “general intelli-
gence.” There are tasks associated with intelligence that may
not have a well-defined economic value (e.g., artistic cre-
ativity or emotional intelligence). Such properties may be
indirectly accounted for in economic measures (e.g., artistic
creativity might produce books or movies, emotional intel-
ligence might relate to the ability to be a successful CEO),
though whether economic value captures the full spectrum
of “intelligence” remains unclear. Another challenge with
framing AGI in terms of economic value is the implied need
for deployment in order to realize that value, whereas a
focus on capabilities might only require the potential for
an AGI to execute a task. We may develop systems that
are technically capable of performing economically impor-
tant tasks but don’t realize that economic value for varied
reasons (legal, ethical, social, etc.).
Case Study 7: Flexible and General – The “Coffee Test”
and Related Challenges. Marcus suggests that AGI is
2


Levels of AGI
“shorthand for any intelligence (there might be many) that
is flexible and general, with resourcefulness and reliability
comparable to (or beyond) human intelligence” (Marcus,
2022b). This definition captures both generality and per-
formance (via the inclusion of reliability); the mention of
“flexibility” is noteworthy, since, like the Shanahan formu-
lation, this suggests that metacognitive capabilities, such
as the ability to learn new skills, are necessary to make an
AI system sufficiently general. Further, Marcus proposes
five tasks to gauge success (understanding a movie, under-
standing a novel, cooking in an arbitrary kitchen, writing a
bug-free 10,000 line program, and converting natural lan-
guage mathematical proofs into symbolic form) (Marcus,
2022a). Accompanying a definition with a benchmark is
valuable; however, more work would be required to make
this benchmark comprehensive. While failing some of these
tasks may indicate a system is not an AGI, it is unclear that
passing them is sufficient for AGI status. In Section 5, we
further discuss the challenge in developing a set of tasks
that is both necessary and sufficient for capturing the gen-
erality of AGI. We also note that one of Marcus’ proposed
tasks, “work as a competent cook in an arbitrary kitchen” (a
variant of Steve Wozniak’s “Coffee Test” (Wozniak, 2010)),
requires robotic embodiment; this differs from other defini-
tions that focus on non-physical tasks2.
Case Study 8: Artificial Capable Intelligence. Suley-
man proposed the concept of “Artificial Capable Intelli-
gence (ACI)” (Mustafa Suleyman and Michael Bhaskar,
2023) to refer to AI systems with sufficient performance
and generality to accomplish complex, multi-step tasks
in the open world.
More specifically, Suleyman pro-
posed an economically-based definition of ACI skill that he
dubbed the “Modern Turing Test,” in which an AI would be
given $100,000 of capital and tasked with turning that into
$1,000,000 over a period of several months. This framing
is more narrow than OpenAI’s definition of economically
valuable work and has the additional downside of poten-
tially introducing alignment risks (Kenton et al., 2021) by
only targeting fiscal profit. However, a strength of Suley-
man’s concept is the focus on performing a complex, multi-
step task that humans value. Construed more broadly than
making a million dollars, ACI’s emphasis on complex, real-
world tasks is noteworthy, since such tasks may have more
ecological validity than many current AI benchmarks; Mar-
cus’ aforementioned five tests of flexibility and generality
(Marcus, 2022a) seem within the spirit of ACI, as well.
Case Study 9: SOTA LLMs as Generalists. Ag¨uera y Ar-
cas and Norvig (Ag¨uera y Arcas & Norvig, 2023) suggested
that state-of-the-art LLMs (e.g. mid-2023 deployments of
2Though robotics might also be implied by the OpenAI char-
ter’s focus on “economically valuable work,” OpenAI shut down
its robotics research division in 2021 (Wiggers, 2021), suggesting
this is not their intended interpretation.
GPT-4, Bard, Llama 2, and Claude) already are AGIs, ar-
guing that generality is the key property of AGI, and that
because language models can discuss a wide range of topics,
execute a wide range of tasks, handle multimodal inputs and
outputs, operate in multiple languages, and “learn” from
zero-shot or few-shot examples, they have achieved suffi-
cient generality. While we agree that generality is a crucial
characteristic of AGI, we posit that it must also be paired
with a measure of performance (i.e., if an LLM can write
code or perform math, but is not reliably correct, then its
generality is not yet sufficiently performant).
3. Defining AGI: Six Principles
Reflecting on these nine example formulations of AGI (or
AGI-adjacent concepts), we identify properties and com-
monalities that we feel contribute to a clear, operationaliz-
able definition of AGI. We argue that any definition of AGI
should meet the following six criteria:
1. Focus on Capabilities, not Processes. The majority of
definitions focus on what an AGI can accomplish, not on the
mechanism by which it accomplishes tasks. This is impor-
tant for identifying characteristics that are not necessarily a
prerequisite for achieving AGI (but may nonetheless be in-
teresting research topics). This focus on capabilities implies
that AGI systems need not necessarily think or understand
in a human-like way (since this focuses on processes); sim-
ilarly, it is not a necessary precursor for AGI that systems
possess qualities such as consciousness (subjective aware-
ness) (Butlin et al., 2023) or sentience (the ability to have
feelings), since these qualities have a process focus.
2. Focus on Generality and Performance. All of the
above definitions emphasize generality to varying degrees,
but some exclude performance criteria. We argue that both
generality and performance are key components of AGI. In
Section 4 we introduce a leveled taxonomy that considers
the interplay between these dimensions.
3. Focus on Cognitive and Metacognitive, but not Phys-
ical, Tasks. Whether to require robotic embodiment (Roy
et al., 2021) as a criterion for AGI is a matter of some de-
bate. Most definitions focus on cognitive tasks, by which
we mean non-physical tasks. Despite recent advances in
robotics (Brohan et al., 2023), physical capabilities for AI
systems seem to be lagging behind non-physical capabili-
ties. It is possible that embodiment in the physical world is
necessary for building the world knowledge to be successful
on some cognitive tasks (Shanahan, 2010), or at least may
be one path to success on some classes of cognitive tasks;
if that turns out to be true then embodiment may be critical
to some paths toward AGI. We suggest that the ability to
perform physical tasks increases a system’s generality, but
should not be considered a necessary prerequisite to achiev-
3


Levels of AGI
ing AGI. On the other hand, metacognitive capabilities (such
as the ability to learn new tasks or the ability to know when
to ask for clarification or assistance from a human) are key
prerequisites for systems to achieve generality.
4. Focus on Potential, not Deployment. Demonstrating
that a system can perform a requisite set of tasks at a given
level of performance should be sufficient for declaring the
system to be an AGI; deployment of such a system in the
open world should not be inherent in the definition of AGI.
For instance, defining AGI in terms of reaching a certain
level of labor substitution would require real-world deploy-
ment, whereas defining AGI in terms of being capable of
substituting for labor would focus on potential. Requiring
deployment as a condition of measuring AGI introduces non-
technical hurdles such as legal and social considerations, as
well as ethical and safety concerns.
5. Focus on Ecological Validity. Tasks that can be used to
benchmark progress toward AGI are critical to operational-
izing any proposed definition. While we discuss this further
in Section 5, we emphasize here the importance of choos-
ing tasks that align with real-world (i.e., ecologically valid)
tasks that people value (construing “value” broadly, not only
as economic value but also social value, artistic value, etc.).
This may mean eschewing traditional AI metrics that are
easy to automate or quantify (Raji et al., 2021) but may not
capture the skills that people would value in an AGI.
6. Focus on the Path to AGI, not a Single Endpoint.
Much as the adoption of a standard set of Levels of Driv-
ing Automation (SAE International, 2021) allowed for clear
discussions of policy and progress relating to autonomous
vehicles, we posit there is value in defining “Levels of AGI.”
As we discuss in Section 5 and Section 6, we intend for
each level of AGI to be associated with a clear set of met-
rics/benchmarks, as well as identified risks introduced at
each level, and resultant changes to the Human-AI Inter-
action paradigm (Morris et al., 2023). This level-based
approach to defining AGI supports the coexistence of many
prominent formulations – for example, Aguera y Arcas &
Norvig’s definition (Ag¨uera y Arcas & Norvig, 2023) would
fall into the “Emerging AGI” category of our ontology, while
OpenAI’s threshold of labor replacement (OpenAI, 2018)
better matches “Exceptional AGI.” Our “Competent AGI”
level is probably the best catch-all for many existing def-
initions of AGI (e.g., the Legg (Legg, 2008), Shanahan
(Shanahan, 2015), and Suleyman (Mustafa Suleyman and
Michael Bhaskar, 2023) formulations). In the next section,
we introduce a level-based ontology of AGI.
4. Levels of AGI
In accordance with Principle 2 (“Focus on Generality and
Performance”) and Principle 6 (“Focus on the Path to AGI,
not a Single Endpoint”), in Table 1 we introduce a matrixed
leveling system that focuses on performance and generality
as the two dimensions that are core to AGI:
Performance refers to the depth of an AI system’s capa-
bilities, i.e., how it compares to human-level performance
for a given task. Note that for all performance levels above
“Emerging,” percentiles are in reference to a sample of adults
who possess the relevant skill (e.g., “Competent” or higher
performance on a task such as English writing ability would
only be measured against the set of adults who are literate
and fluent in English).
Generality refers to the breadth of an AI system’s capabili-
ties, i.e., the range of tasks for which an AI system reaches
a target performance threshold.
This taxonomy specifies the minimum performance over
most tasks needed to achieve a given rating – e.g., a Com-
petent AGI must have performance at least at the 50th per-
centile for skilled adult humans on most cognitive tasks, but
may have Expert, Exceptional3, or even Superhuman perfor-
mance on a subset of tasks. As an example of how individual
systems may straddle different points in our taxonomy, we
posit that as of this writing in September 2023, frontier lan-
guage models (e.g., ChatGPT (OpenAI, 2023), Bard (Anil
et al., 2023), Llama2 (Touvron et al., 2023), etc.) exhibit
“Competent” performance levels for some tasks (e.g., short
essay writing, simple coding), but are still at “Emerging”
performance levels for most tasks (e.g., mathematical abil-
ities, tasks involving factuality). Overall, current frontier
language models would therefore be considered a Level 1
General AI (“Emerging AGI”) until the performance level
increases for a broader set of tasks (at which point the Level
2 General AI, “Competent AGI,” criteria would be met).
We suggest that documentation for frontier AI models, such
as model cards (Mitchell et al., 2019), should detail this
mixture of performance levels. This will help end-users,
policymakers, and other stakeholders come to a shared, nu-
anced understanding of the likely uneven performance of
systems progressing along the path to AGI.
The order in which stronger skills in specific cognitive areas
are acquired may have serious implications for AI safety
(e.g., acquiring strong knowledge of chemical engineering
before acquiring strong ethical reasoning skills may be a
dangerous combination). Note also that the rate of progres-
sion between levels of performance and/or generality may
be nonlinear. Acquiring the capability to learn new skills
may particularly accelerate progress toward the next level.
While this taxonomy rates systems according to their perfor-
mance, systems that are capable of achieving a certain level
3While Level 4 was originally called “Virtuoso AGI,” we now
use the term “Exceptional AGI,” (Shah et al., 2025) which we
believe better captures this capability level.
4


Levels of AGI
Table 1. A leveled, matrixed approach toward classifying systems on the path to AGI based on depth (performance) and breadth (generality)
of capabilities. The assignment of example systems to cells is approximate. Unambiguous classification of AI systems will require a
standardized benchmark of tasks, as we discuss in Section 5. Note that general systems that broadly perform at a level N may be able to
perform a narrow subset of tasks at higher levels. The “Competent AGI” level, which has not been achieved by any public systems at the
time of writing, best corresponds to many prior conceptions of AGI, and may precipitate rapid societal change once achieved.
Performance (rows) x
Generality (columns)
Narrow
clearly scoped task or set of tasks
General
wide range of non-physical tasks, includ-
ing metacognitive tasks like learning new
skills
Level 0: No AI
Narrow Non-AI
calculator software; compiler
General Non-AI
human-in-the-loop computing, e.g., Ama-
zon Mechanical Turk
Level 1: Emerging
equal to or somewhat better than an un-
skilled human
Emerging Narrow AI
GOFAI (Boden, 2014); simple rule-based
systems, e.g., SHRDLU (Winograd, 1971)
Emerging AGI
ChatGPT (OpenAI, 2023), Bard (Anil
et al., 2023), Llama 2 (Touvron et al.,
2023), Gemini (Pichai & Hassabis, 2023)
Level 2: Competent
at least 50th percentile of skilled adults
Competent Narrow AI
toxicity detectors such as Jigsaw (Das et al.,
2022); Smart Speakers such as Siri (Ap-
ple), Alexa (Amazon), or Google Assis-
tant (Google); VQA systems such as PaLI
(Chen et al., 2023); Watson (IBM); SOTA
LLMs for a subset of tasks (e.g., short es-
say writing, simple coding)
Competent AGI
not yet achieved
Level 3: Expert
at least 90th percentile of skilled adults
Expert Narrow AI
spelling & grammar checkers such as
Grammarly (Grammarly, 2023); genera-
tive image models such as Imagen (Saharia
et al., 2022) or Dall-E 2 (Ramesh et al.,
2022)
Expert AGI
not yet achieved
Level 4: Exceptional
at least 99th percentile of skilled adults
Exceptional Narrow AI
Deep Blue (Campbell et al., 2002), Al-
phaGo (Silver et al., 2016; 2017)
Exceptional AGI
not yet achieved
Level 5: Superhuman
outperforms 100% of humans
Superhuman Narrow AI
AlphaFold (Jumper et al., 2021; Varadi
et al., 2021), AlphaZero (Silver et al.,
2018), StockFish (Stockfish, 2023)
Artificial Superintelligence (ASI)
not yet achieved
of performance (e.g., against a given benchmark) may not
match this level in practice when deployed. For instance,
user interface limitations may reduce deployed performance.
Consider DALLE-2 (Ramesh et al., 2022), which we es-
timate as a Level 3 Narrow AI (“Expert Narrow AI”) in
our taxonomy. We estimate the “Expert” level of perfor-
mance since DALLE-2 produces images of higher quality
than most people are able to draw; however, the system
has failure modes (e.g., drawing hands with incorrect num-
bers of digits, rendering nonsensical or illegible text) that
prevent it from achieving an “Exceptional” performance
designation. While theoretically an “Expert” level system,
in practice the system may only be “Competent,” because
prompting interfaces are too complex for most end-users
to elicit optimal performance (as evidenced by user studies
(Zamfirescu-Pereira et al., 2023) and the existence of market-
places (e.g., PromptBase) in which skilled prompt engineers
sell prompts). This observation emphasizes the importance
of designing ecologically valid benchmarks (that approxi-
mate deployed rather than idealized performance), as well
as the importance of considering the human-AI interaction
paradigms.
The highest level in our matrix in terms of combined perfor-
mance and generality is ASI (Artificial Superintelligence).
We define “Superhuman” performance as outperforming
100% of humans. For instance, we posit that AlphaFold
(Jumper et al., 2021; Varadi et al., 2021) is a Level 5 Narrow
AI (“Superhuman Narrow AI”) since it performs a single
task (predicting a protein’s 3D structure from an amino acid
sequence) above the level of the world’s top scientists. This
definition means that Level 5 General AI (“ASI”) systems
will be able to do a wide range of tasks at a level that no
human can match. Additionally, this framing also implies
that Superhuman systems may be able to perform an even
broader generality of tasks than lower levels of AGI, since
the ability to execute tasks that qualitatively differ from
5


Levels of AGI
existing human skills would by definition outperform all hu-
mans (who fundamentally cannot do such tasks). For exam-
ple, non-human skills that an ASI might have could include
capabilities such as neural interfaces (perhaps through mech-
anisms such as analyzing brain signals to decode thoughts
(Tang et al., 2023; Bellier et al., 2023)), oracular abilities
(perhaps through mechanisms such as analyzing large vol-
umes of data to make high-quality predictions (Schoenegger
& Park, 2023)), or the ability to communicate with animals
(perhaps by mechanisms such as analyzing patterns in their
vocalizations, brain waves, or body language (Goldwasser
et al., 2023; Andreas et al., 2022)).
5. Testing for AGI
Two of our six proposed principles for defining AGI (Princi-
ple 2: Generality and Performance; Principle 6: Focus on
the Path to AGI) influenced our choice of a matrixed, leveled
ontology for facilitating nuanced discussions of the breadth
and depth of AI capabilities. Our remaining four principles
(Principle 1: Capabilities, not Processes; Principle 3: Cog-
nitive and Metacognitive Tasks; Principle 4: Potential, not
Deployment; and Principle 5: Ecological Validity) relate to
the issue of measurement.
While our performance dimension specifies one aspect of
measurement (e.g., percentile ranges for task performance
relative to particular subsets of people), our generality di-
mension leaves open important questions: What is the set of
tasks that constitute the generality criteria? What proportion
of such tasks must an AI system master to achieve a given
level of generality in our schema? Are there some tasks that
must always be performed to meet the criteria for certain
generality levels, such as metacognitive tasks?
Operationalizing an AGI definition requires answering these
questions, as well as developing specific diverse and chal-
lenging tasks. Because of the immense complexity of this
process, as well as the importance of including a wide range
of perspectives (including cross-organizational and multi-
disciplinary viewpoints), we do not propose a benchmark in
this paper. Instead, we work to clarify the ontology a bench-
mark should attempt to measure. We also discuss properties
an AGI benchmark should possess.
Our intent is that an AGI benchmark would include a broad
suite of cognitive and metacognitive tasks (per Principle 3),
measuring diverse properties including (but not limited to)
linguistic intelligence, mathematical and logical reasoning
(Webb et al., 2023), spatial reasoning, interpersonal and
intra-personal social intelligences, the ability to learn new
skills (Chollet, 2019), and creativity. A benchmark might
include tests covering psychometric categories proposed
by theories of intelligence from psychology, neuroscience,
cognitive science, and education; however, such tests must
first be evaluated for suitability for benchmarking comput-
ing systems, since many may lack ecological and construct
validity in this context (Serapio-Garc´ıa et al., 2023).
We emphasize the importance of metacognition, and suggest
that an AGI benchmark should include metacognitive tasks
such as (1) the ability to learn new skills, (2) the ability
to know when to ask for help, and (3) social metacogni-
tive abilities such as those relating to theory of mind. The
ability to learn new skills (Chollet, 2019) is essential to
generality, since it is infeasible for a system to be optimized
for all possible use cases a priori; this necessitates related
sub-skills such as the ability to select appropriate strategies
for learning (Pressley et al., 1987). Knowing when to ask
for help is necessary to support alignment and appropriate
human-AI interaction (Terry et al., 2023), and would in-
clude an awareness of the limits of the model’s own abilities
(Demetriou & Kazi, 2006), which relates to the sub-skill
of model calibration (Liang et al., 2023), i.e., the model’s
ability to proactively anticipate and retroactively evaluate
how well it would do/did on certain tasks. Additionally, the-
ory of mind tasks are sometimes considered metacognitive
(Tullis & Fraundorf, 2017), though are sometimes classified
separately as social cognition (Gardner, 2011); the ability
of systems to accurately model end-users is a necessary
component of alignment for AGI systems.
One open question for benchmark design is whether to allow
the use of tools, including potentially AI-powered tools, as
an aid to human performance. This choice may ultimately
be task dependent and should account for ecological validity
in benchmark choice (per Principle 5). For example, in
determining whether a self-driving car is sufficiently safe,
benchmarking against a person driving without the benefit of
any modern AI-assisted safety tools would not be the most
informative comparison; since the relevant counterfactual
involves some driver-assistance technology, we may prefer
a comparison to that baseline.
While an AGI benchmark might draw from some existing
AI benchmarks (Lynch, 2023) (e.g., HELM (Liang et al.,
2023), BIG-bench (Srivastava et al., 2023)), we also envi-
sion the inclusion of open-ended and/or interactive tasks
that might require qualitative evaluation (Papakyriakopou-
los et al., 2021; Yang et al., 2023; Bubeck et al., 2023). We
suspect that these latter classes of complex, open-ended
tasks, though difficult to benchmark, will have better eco-
logical validity than traditional AI metrics, or than adapted
traditional measures of human intelligence.
It is impossible to enumerate the full set of tasks achiev-
able by a sufficiently general intelligence. As such, an AGI
benchmark should be a living benchmark. Such a bench-
mark should therefore include a framework for generating
and agreeing upon new tasks.
6


Levels of AGI
Determining that something is not an AGI at a given level
simply requires identifying tasks that people can typically
do but the system cannot adequately perform. Systems that
pass the majority of the envisioned AGI benchmark at a par-
ticular performance level (“Emerging,” “Competent,” etc.),
including new tasks added by the testers, can be assumed to
have the associated level of generality for practical purposes
(i.e., though in theory there could still be a test the AGI
would fail, at some point unprobed failures are so special-
ized or atypical as to be practically irrelevant). We hesitate
to specify the number or percentage of tasks that a system
must pass at a given level of performance in order to be
declared a General AI at that Level (e.g., a rule such as
“a system must pass at least 90% of an AGI benchmark at
a given performance level to get that rating”). While we
think this will be a very high percentage, it will probably
not be 100%, since it seems clear that broad but imperfect
generality is impactful (individual humans also lack consis-
tent performance across all possible tasks, but are generally
intelligent). Determining what portion of benchmarking
tasks at a given level demonstrate generality remains an
open research question.
6. Risk, Autonomy, and Interaction
Discussions of AGI often include discussion of risk, includ-
ing “x-risk” – existential (for AI Safety, 2023) or other very
extreme risks (Shevlane et al., 2023). A leveled approach
to defining AGI enables a more nuanced discussion of how
different combinations of performance and generality re-
late to different types of AI risk. While there is value in
considering extreme risk scenarios, understanding AGI via
our proposed ontology rather than as a single endpoint (per
Principle 6) can help ensure that policymakers also identify
and prioritize risks in the near-term and on the path to AGI.
6.1. Levels of AGI as a Framework for Risk Assessment
As we advance along our capability levels toward ASI, new
risks are introduced, including misuse risks, alignment risks,
and structural risks (Zwetsloot & Dafoe, 2019). For exam-
ple, the “Expert AGI” level is likely to involve structural
risks related to economic disruption and job displacement,
as more and more industries reach the substitution threshold
for machine intelligence in lieu of human labor. On the other
hand, reaching “Expert AGI” likely alleviates some risks
introduced by “Emerging AGI” and “Competent AGI,” such
as the risk of incorrect task execution. The “Exceptional
AGI” and “ASI” levels are where many concerns relating
to x-risk are most likely to emerge (e.g., an AI that can
outperform its human operators on a broad range of tasks
might deceive them to achieve a mis-specified goal, as in
misalignment thought experiments (Christian, 2020)).
Systemic risks such as destabilization of international rela-
tions may be a concern if the rate of progression between
levels outpaces regulation or diplomacy (e.g., the first nation
to achieve ASI may have a substantial geopolitical/military
advantage, creating complex structural risks). At levels
below “Expert AGI” (e.g., “Emerging AGI,” “Competent
AGI,” and all “Narrow” AI categories), risks likely stem
more from human actions (e.g., risks of AI misuse, whether
accidental, incidental, or malicious). A more complete anal-
ysis of risk profiles associated with each level is a critical
step toward developing a taxonomy of AGI that can guide
safety/ethics research and policymaking.
Whether an AGI benchmark should include tests for po-
tentially dangerous capabilities (e.g., the ability to deceive,
to persuade (Veerabadran et al., 2023), or to perform ad-
vanced biochemistry (Morris, 2023)) is controversial. We
lean on the side of including such capabilities in bench-
marking, since most such skills tend to be dual use (having
valid applications to socially positive scenarios as well as
nefarious ones). Dangerous capability benchmarking can be
de-risked via Principle 4 (Potential, not Deployment) by en-
suring benchmarks for any dangerous or dual-use tasks are
appropriately sandboxed and not defined in terms of deploy-
ment. However, including such tests in a public benchmark
may allow malicious actors to optimize for these abilities;
understanding how to mitigate risks associated with bench-
marking dual-use abilities remains an important area for
research by AI safety, AI ethics, and AI governance experts.
Concurrent with this work, Anthropic released Version
1.0 of its Responsible Scaling Policy (RSP) (Anthropic,
2023b). This policy uses a levels-based approach (inspired
by biosafety levels (Richmond & McKinney, 2009)) to de-
fine the level of risk associated with an AI system, identify-
ing what dangerous capabilities may be associated with each
AI Safety Level (ASL), and what containment or deploy-
ment measures should be taken at each level. Current SOTA
generative AIs are classified as an ASL-2 risk. Including
items matched to ASL capabilities in any AGI benchmark
would connect points in our AGI taxonomy to specific risks
and mitigations.
6.2. Capabilities vs. Autonomy
While capabilities provide prerequisites for AI risks, AI
systems (including AGI systems) do not and will not op-
erate in a vacuum. Rather, AI systems are deployed with
particular interfaces and used to achieve particular tasks in
specific scenarios. These contextual attributes (interface,
task, scenario, end-user) have substantial bearing on risk.
Consider, for instance, the affordances of user interfaces for
AGI systems. Increasing capabilities unlock new interac-
tion paradigms, but do not determine them. Rather, system
designers and end-users will settle on a mode of human-
AI interaction (Morris et al., 2023) that balances a variety
7


Levels of AGI
Table 2. More capable AI systems unlock new human-AI interaction paradigms. The choice of appropriate autonomy level need not be
the maximum achievable given the capabilities of the underlying model. One consideration in the choice of autonomy level are resulting
risks. This table’s examples illustrate the importance of carefully considering human-AI interaction design decisions.
Autonomy Level
Example Systems
Unlocking
AGI Level(s)
Example Risks
Introduced
Autonomy Level 0:
No AI
human does everything
Analogue approaches (e.g., sketching
with pencil on paper)
Non-AI digital workflows (e.g., typing in
a text editor; drawing in a paint program)
No AI
n/a (status quo risks)
Autonomy Level 1:
AI as a Tool
human fully controls task
and uses AI to automate
mundane sub-tasks
Information-seeking with the aid of a
search engine
Revising writing with the aid of a
grammar-checking program
Reading a sign with a
machine translation app
Possible:
Emerging Narrow AI
Likely:
Competent Narrow AI
de-skilling
(e.g., over-reliance)
disruption of
established
industries
Autonomy Level 2:
AI as a Consultant
AI takes on a
substantive role, but only
when invoked by a human
Relying on a language model to summa-
rize a set of documents
Accelerating
computer
programming
with a code-generating model
Consuming
most
entertainment
via
a sophisticated recommender system
Possible:
Competent Narrow AI
Likely:
Expert Narrow AI;
Emerging AGI
over-trust
radicalization
targeted
manipulation
Autonomy Level 3:
AI as a
Collaborator
co-equal human-AI collab-
oration; interactive coordi-
nation of goals & tasks
Training as a chess player through
interactions with and analysis of a
chess-playing AI
Entertainment
via
social
interac-
tions with AI-generated personalities
Possible:
Emerging AGI
Likely:
Expert Narrow AI;
Competent AGI
anthropomorphization (e.g.,
parasocial
relationships)
rapid societal change
Autonomy Level 4:
AI as an Expert
AI drives interaction; hu-
man provides guidance &
feedback or performs sub-
tasks
Using an AI system to advance scientific
discovery (e.g., protein-folding)
Possible:
Exceptional Narrow AI
Likely:
Expert AGI
societal-scale ennui
mass labor
displacement
decline
of
human
ex-
ceptionalism
Autonomy Level 5:
AI as an Agent
fully autonomous AI
Autonomous AI-powered
personal assistants
(not yet unlocked)
Likely:
Exceptional AGI;
ASI
misalignment
concentration
of power
of considerations, including safety. We propose character-
izing human-AI interaction paradigms with six Levels of
Autonomy, described in Table 2.
These Levels of Autonomy are correlated with the Levels
of AGI. Higher levels of autonomy are “unlocked” by AGI
capability progression, though lower levels of autonomy
may be desirable for particular tasks and contexts even as
we reach higher levels of AGI. Carefully considered choices
around human-AI interaction are vital to safe and responsi-
ble deployment of frontier AI models.
Unlike prior taxonomies of computer automation (Sheridan
et al., 1978; Sheridan & Parasuraman, 2005; Parasuraman
et al., 2000) that take a computer-centric perspective (fram-
ing automation in terms of how much control the designer
relinquishes to computers), we characterize the concept
of autonomy through the lens of the nature of human-AI
interaction style; further, our ontology considers how AI
capabilities may enable particular interaction paradigms and
how the combination of level of autonomy and level of AGI
may impact risk. Shneiderman (Shneiderman, 2020) ob-
serves that automation is not a zero-sum game, and that
high levels of automation can co-exist with high levels of
human control; this view is compatible with our perspec-
tive of considering automation through the perspective of
varying styles of human-AI partnerships.
We emphasize the importance of the “No AI” paradigm for
many contexts, including for education, enjoyment, assess-
8


Levels of AGI
ment, or safety reasons. For example, in the domain of
self-driving vehicles, when Level 5 Self-Driving technology
is widely available, there may be reasons for using a Level
0 (No Automation) vehicle. These include for instructing
a new driver (education), for pleasure by driving enthusi-
asts (enjoyment), for driver’s licensing exams (assessment),
or in conditions where sensors cannot be relied upon such
as technology failures or extreme weather events (safety).
While Level 5 Self-Driving (SAE International, 2021) ve-
hicles would likely be a Level 4 or 5 Narrow AI under our
taxonomy, the same considerations regarding human vs.
computer autonomy apply to AGIs. We may develop an
AGI, but choose not to deploy it autonomously, or choose
to deploy it with differentiated autonomy levels in distinct
circumstances as dictated by contextual considerations.
Certain aspects of generality may be required to make par-
ticular interaction paradigms desirable. For example, the
Autonomy Levels 3, 4, and 5 (“Collaborator,” “Expert,”
and “Agent”) may only work well if an AI system also
demonstrates strong performance on certain metacognitive
abilities (learning when to ask a human for help, theory of
mind modeling, social-emotional skills). Implicit in our
definition of Autonomy Level 5 (“AI as an Agent”) is that
such a fully autonomous AI can act in an aligned fashion
without continuous human oversight, but knows when to
consult humans (Shah et al., 2021). Interfaces that support
human-AI alignment through better task specification, the
bridging of process gulfs, and evaluation of outputs (Terry
et al., 2023) are a vital area of research.
6.3. Human-AI Interaction and Risk Assessment
Table 2 illustrates the interplay between AGI Level, Auton-
omy Level, and risk. Advances in model performance and
generality unlock additional interaction paradigm choices
(including full autonomy). These interaction paradigms in
turn introduce new classes of risk. The interplay of model
capabilities and interaction design will enable more nuanced
risk assessments and responsible deployment decisions than
considering model capabilities alone.
Table 2 also provides concrete examples of each of our six
proposed Levels of Autonomy. For each level of auton-
omy, we indicate the corresponding levels of performance
and generality that “unlock” that interaction paradigm (i.e.,
the level of AGI at which it is possible or likely for that
paradigm to be successfully deployed and adopted).
Our predictions regarding “unlocking” levels tend to require
higher levels of performance for Narrow than for General
AI systems; for instance, we posit that the use of AI as a
Consultant is likely with either an Expert Narrow AI or an
Emerging AGI. This discrepancy reflects the fact that for
General systems, capability development is likely to be un-
even; for example, a Level 1 General AI (“Emerging AGI”)
may have Level 2 or perhaps even Level 3 performance
across some subset of tasks. Such unevenness of capability
for General AIs may unlock higher autonomy levels for
particular tasks that are aligned with their specific strengths.
Considering AGI systems in the context of use by people
allows us to reflect on the interplay between advances in
models and advances in human-AI interaction paradigms.
The role of model building research can be seen as help-
ing systems’ capabilities progress along the path to AGI in
their performance and generality, such that an AI system’s
abilities will overlap an increasingly large portion of human
abilities. Conversely, the role of human-AI interaction re-
search can be viewed as ensuring new AI systems are usable
by and useful to people such that AI systems successfully ex-
tend people’s capabilities (i.e., “intelligence augmentation”
(Brynjolfsson, 2022; Englebart, 1962)).
7. Conclusion
Artificial General Intelligence is a concept of both aspira-
tional and practical consequences. We analyzed nine defini-
tions of AGI, identifying strengths and weaknesses. Based
on this analysis, we introduced six principles for a clear, op-
erationalizable definition of AGI: focusing on capabilities,
not processes; focusing on generality and performance; fo-
cusing on cognitive and metacognitive (rather than physical)
tasks; focusing on potential rather than deployment; focus-
ing on ecological validity for benchmarking; and focusing
on the path to AGI rather than a single endpoint.
With these principles in mind, we introduced our Levels
of AGI ontology, which offers a more nuanced way to de-
fine progress toward AGI by considering generality (either
Narrow or General) in tandem with five levels of perfor-
mance (Emerging, Competent, Expert, Exceptional, and
Superhuman). We reflected on how current AI systems and
AGI definitions fit into this framing. Further, we discussed
the implications of our principles for developing a living,
ecologically valid AGI benchmark, and argue that such an
endeavor, while sure to be challenging, is vital to engage
with.
Finally, we considered how our principles and ontology
can reshape discussions around the risks associated with
AGI. Notably, we observed that AGI is not necessarily syn-
onymous with autonomy. We introduced Levels of Auton-
omy that are unlocked, but not determined by, progression
through the Levels of AGI. We illustrated how consider-
ing AGI Level jointly with Autonomy Level can provide
more nuanced insights into risks associated with AI systems,
underscoring the importance of investing in human-AI inter-
action research in tandem with model improvements.
We hope our framework will prove adaptable and scalable –
for instance, how we define and measure progress toward
9


Levels of AGI
AGI might change with technical advances such as improve-
ments in interpretability that provide insight into models’
inner workings. Additionally, parts of our ontology such as
Human-AI Interaction paradigms and associated risks might
evolve as society itself adapts to advances in AI.
Impact Statement
This position paper introduces a novel ontology that sup-
ports discussing progress toward AGI in a nuanced manner,
with the aim of supporting clear communication among re-
searchers, practitioners, and policymakers about systems’
capabilities and associated risks.
Acknowledgements
Thank you to the members of the Google DeepMind PAGI
team for their support of this effort, and to Martin Watten-
berg, Michael Terry, Geoffrey Irving, Murray Shanahan,
Dileep George, Blaise Ag¨uera y Arcas, and Ben Shneider-
man for helpful discussions about this topic.
References
Ag¨uera y Arcas, B. and Norvig, P.
Artificial Gen-
eral Intelligence is Already Here.
Noema, October
2023.
URL
https://www.noemamag.com/
artificial-general-intelligence-is-already-here/.
Amazon.
Amazon Alexa.
URL https://alexa.
amazon.com/. accessed on October 20, 2023.
Andreas, J., Beguˇs, G., Bronstein, M. M., Diamant,
R., Delaney, D., Gero, S., Goldwasser, S., Gruber,
D. F., de Haas, S., Malkin, P., Pavlov, N., Payne,
R., Petri, G., Rus, D., Sharma, P., Tchernov, D.,
Tønnesen, P., Torralba, A., Vogt, D., and Wood, R. J.
Toward understanding the communication in sperm
whales.
iScience, 25(6):104393, 2022.
ISSN 2589-
0042. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.isci.2022.104393.
URL
https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S2589004222006642.
Anil, R., Dai, A. M., Firat, O., and et al.
PaLM 2
Technical Report. CoRR, abs/2305.10403, 2023. doi:
10.48550/arXiv.2305.10403. URL https://arxiv.
org/abs/2305.10403.
Anthropic. Company: Anthropic, 2023a. URL https://
www.anthropic.com/company. Accessed October
12, 2023.
Anthropic.
Anthropic’s Responsible Scaling Policy,
September 2023b.
URL https://www-files.
anthropic.com/production/files/
responsible-scaling-policy-1.0.pdf.
accessed on October 20, 2023.
Apple. Siri. URL https://www.apple.com/siri/.
accessed on October 20, 2023.
Bellier, L., Llorens, A., Marciano, D., Gunduz, A.,
Schalk, G., Brunner, P., and Knight, R. T.
Music
can be reconstructed from human auditory cortex ac-
tivity using nonlinear decoding models.
PLOS Bi-
ology, 21(8):1–27, 08 2023.
doi:
10.1371/journal.
pbio.3002176. URL https://doi.org/10.1371/
journal.pbio.3002176.
Bengio, Y., Hinton, G., Yao, A., Song, D., Abbeel, P.,
Harari, Y. N., Zhang, Y.-Q., Xue, L., Shalev-Shwartz,
S., Hadfield, G., Clune, J., Maharaj, T., Hutter, F., Bay-
din, A. G., McIlraith, S., Gao, Q., Acharya, A., Krueger,
D., Dragan, A., Torr, P., Russell, S., Kahneman, D.,
Brauner, J., and Mindermann, S. Managing AI Risks
in an Era of Rapid Progress. CoRR, abs/2310.17688,
2023. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2310.17688. URL https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2310.17688.
Boden, M. A. GOFAI, pp. 89–107. Cambridge University
Press, 2014.
Brohan, A., Brown, N., Carbajal, J., Chebotar, Y., Chen,
X., Choromanski, K., Ding, T., Driess, D., Dubey, A.,
Finn, C., Florence, P., Fu, C., Arenas, M. G., Gopalakr-
ishnan, K., Han, K., Hausman, K., Herzog, A., Hsu, J.,
Ichter, B., Irpan, A., Joshi, N., Julian, R., Kalashnikov,
D., Kuang, Y., Leal, I., Lee, L., Lee, T.-W. E., Levine, S.,
Lu, Y., Michalewski, H., Mordatch, I., Pertsch, K., Rao,
K., Reymann, K., Ryoo, M., Salazar, G., Sanketi, P., Ser-
manet, P., Singh, J., Singh, A., Soricut, R., Tran, H., Van-
houcke, V., Vuong, Q., Wahid, A., Welker, S., Wohlhart,
P., Wu, J., Xia, F., Xiao, T., Xu, P., Xu, S., Yu, T., and
Zitkovich, B. RT-2: Vision-Language-Action Models
Transfer Web Knowledge to Robotic Control. CoRR,
abs/2307.15818, 2023. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2307.15818.
URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2307.15818.
Brynjolfsson, E.
The Turing Trap:
The Promise &
Peril of Human-Like Artificial Intelligence.
CoRR,
abs/2201.04200, 2022. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2201.04200.
URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2201.04200.
Bubeck, S., Chandrasekaran, V., Eldan, R., Gehrke, J.,
Horvitz, E., Kamar, E., Lee, P., Lee, Y. T., Li, Y., Lund-
berg, S., Nori, H., Palangi, H., Ribeiro, M. T., and
Zhang, Y.
Sparks of Artificial General Intelligence:
Early experiments with GPT-4. CoRR, abs/2303.12712,
2023. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2303.12712. URL https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2303.12712.
10
