Title: Sag-Free Initialization for Strand-Based Hybrid Hair Simulation

Sag-Free Initialization for Strand-Based Hybrid Hair Simulation
JERRY HSU∗, University of Utah & LightSpeed Studios, USA
TONGTONG WANG, LightSpeed Studios, China
ZHERONG PAN, LightSpeed Studios, USA
XIFENG GAO, LightSpeed Studios, USA
CEM YUKSEL, University of Utah & Roblox, USA
KUI WU, LightSpeed Studios, USA
Guide hairs
Full hairs
z                                                                              }|                                                                              {
z                                                                              }|                                                                              {
Naive
[Hsu et al. 2022]
Ours
Naive
[Hsu et al. 2022]
Ours
Fig. 1. On an example wavy hairstyle “Long”, we compare three techniques applicable to the Lagrangian/Eulerian hybrid strand-based hair
simulation techniques: the naive initialization that treats the given initial shape as the rest shape, the previous sag-free initialization approach [Hsu
et al. 2022], and ours. While both naive and previous sag-free initializations lead to hairs sliding down with gravity, our initialization can preserve
the given initial hairstyle shape by treating it as the intended shape in static equilibrium under gravity. The left is the guide hairs used for the
actual initialization and simulation, while the right shows the full hairs interpolated from the guide hairs.
Lagrangian/Eulerian hybrid strand-based hair simulation techniques have
quickly become a popular approach in VFX and real-time graphics applica-
tions. With Lagrangian hair dynamics, the inter-hair contacts are resolved
in the Eulerian grid using the continuum method, i.e., the MPM scheme
with the granular Drucker–Prager rheology, to avoid expensive collision
detection and handling. This fuzzy collision handling makes the authoring
process significantly easier. However, although current hair grooming tools
provide a wide range of strand-based modeling tools for this simulation
approach, the crucial sag-free initialization functionality remains often ig-
nored. Thus, when the simulation starts, gravity would cause any artistic
hairstyle to sag and deform into unintended and undesirable shapes.
This paper proposes a novel four-stage sag-free initialization framework
to solve stable quasistatic configurations for hybrid strand-based hair dy-
∗Part of this work was done when Jerry Hsu was an intern at LightSpeed Studios.
Authors’ addresses: Jerry Hsu, jerry060599@gmail.com, University of Utah & Light-
Speed Studios, Salt lake city, UT, USA; Tongtong Wang, tongttwang@tencent.com,
LightSpeed Studios, Shenzhen, Guangzhou, China; Zherong Pan, zrpan@global.tencent.
com, LightSpeed Studios, Seattle, WA, USA; Xifeng Gao, xifgao@global.tencent.com,
LightSpeed Studios, Seattle, WA, USA; Cem Yuksel, cem@cemyuksel.com, University of
Utah & Roblox, Salt lake city, UT, USA; Kui Wu, kwwu@global.tencent.com, LightSpeed
Studios, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the
author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
© 2018 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
0730-0301/2023/8-ART1 $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3592143
namic systems. These four stages are split into two global-local pairs. The
first one ensures static equilibrium at every Eulerian grid node with ad-
ditional inequality constraints to prevent stress from exiting the yielding
surface. We then derive several associated closed-form solutions in the local
stage to compute segment rest lengths, orientations, and particle deforma-
tion gradients in parallel. The second global-local step solves along each hair
strand to ensure all the bend and twist constraints produce zero net torque
on every hair segment, followed by a local step to adjust the rest Darboux
vectors to a unit quaternion. We also introduce an essential modification
for the Darboux vector to eliminate the ambiguity of the Cosserat rod rest
pose in both initialization and simulation. We evaluate our method on a
wide range of hairstyles, and our approach can only take a few seconds
to minutes to get the rest quasistatic configurations for hundreds of hair
strands. Our results show that our method successfully prevents sagging
and has minimal impact on the hair motion during simulation.
CCS Concepts: • Computing methodologies →Physical simulation.
Additional Key Words and Phrases: Hybrid MPM-Hair, Inverse Modeling,
Sag-Free Simulation
ACM Reference Format:
Jerry Hsu, Tongtong Wang, Zherong Pan, Xifeng Gao, Cem Yuksel, and Kui
Wu. 2023. Sag-Free Initialization for Strand-Based Hybrid Hair Simulation.
ACM Trans. Graph. 42, 4, Article 1 (August 2023), 14 pages. https://doi.org/
10.1145/3592143
1
INTRODUCTION
Hair simulations have long been an active research topic in com-
puter graphics that plays a critical role in the appearance and ani-
mation of humans and animals. Among various physically-based
ACM Trans. Graph., Vol. 42, No. 4, Article 1. Publication date: August 2023.


1:2
•
Jerry Hsu, Tongtong Wang, Zherong Pan, Xifeng Gao, Cem Yuksel, and Kui Wu
models, Lagrangian/Eulerian hybrid strand-based hair simulation
techniques [Fei et al. 2021a; Han et al. 2019; Jiang et al. 2017] have
quickly become very popular in both VFX and real-time applications,
achieving a superb balance between realism and performance over
the sheet- and volumetric-based methods [Koh and Huang 2001;
Wu and Yuksel 2016]. These hybrid techniques use Cosserat rod
theory [Kugelstadt and Schömer 2016] to model individual strand
deformations while relying on the continuum method, e.g., the MPM
scheme with the granular Drucker–Prager rheology, to handle con-
tacts between strands. With the prevalence of these simulations,
several hair grooming tools, such as Maya XGen, Yeti, and nHair,
have been introduced to aid artists in the creation of strand-based
visual hair models. However, since these tools do not model any
internal or external forces, the designed visual hair models are
rarely simulation-ready. Indeed, as soon as the simulation starts,
hair strands suffer from sagging (Fig. 1 left), i.e., unintended sliding
and deformation due to gravity ruins carefully handcrafted hairstyle.
Although there has been a successful attempt toward sag-free
hair modeling [Derouet-Jourdan et al. 2013], their method targets
a purely Lagrangian hair simulation system and solves for static
equilibrium configuration under Lagrangian contact forces. How-
ever, expensive hair-hair contact handling renders it impossible
to achieve real-time Lagrangian simulations. On the other hand,
extending their method to Lagrangian/Eulerian hybrid hair systems
can be non-trivial, since the hybrid method handles the frictional
contacts using the drastically different particles using the granular
Drucker–Prager rheology MPM scheme.
Recently, Hsu et al. [2022] introduced a general framework for sag-
free initialization of deformable simulations. This method utilizes an
efficient global-local optimizer to fine-tune rest configurations that
cancel out external forces (such as gravity and contacts). While this
is a highly-promising and flexible approach that works with various
simulation systems, hybrid hair simulations are not among them
(Fig. 1 middle). This is owing to the fact that the Cosserat rod model
tightly couples point-wise translational, segment-wise rotational,
and grid-wise contact degrees of freedom. Simply decomposing this
highly non-linear constrained problem into multiple small problems,
as in the previous work, is non-trivial. Canceling out the forces and
torques for such an intricate system requires substantially restruc-
turing the global-local optimization approach. This further applies
to stability-related concerns exacerbated by twisting and particle
slippage, for which the prior work presents no solutions. We see
this as a great missed opportunity as the fuzzy contact handling
of hybrid hair simulations naturally lends it to practical and useful
sag-free initialization.
In this paper, we propose a novel four-stage sag-free initialization
framework that is the first to solve stable quasistatic configurations
for hybrid strand-based hair systems (Fig. 1 right). We first intro-
duce an essential modification for the Darboux vector to eliminate
the ambiguity of the Cosserat rod rest pose in both initialization
and simulation. We further propose a four-stage sag-free initializa-
tion algorithm, which is split into two global-local pairs. The first
global-local pair ensures zero net force at every grid node, followed
by a second global-local pair that ensures zero net torque at every
hair segment. We enforce additional inequality constraints in the
first global stage to prevent stress from exiting the yielding sur-
face and then derive several associated closed-form solutions and
constraints in the latter local stages to ensure computational effi-
ciency and simulation stability. To cancel out the torque produced
by the first global-local step, the second global-local step solves
along each hair strand separately to ensure zero net torque on every
hair segment, followed by a novel local quaternion adjustment to
ensure rest Darboux vectors to be unit quaternions. We show that
decomposing the highly non-linear quasi-static problem into multi-
ple small constrained linear problems is possible. And we prove that
our four-stage algorithm is guaranteed to yield feasible rest poses
with zero net force and torque.
We validate our method on an efficient hybrid GPU hair simu-
lator, which is built off of several existing techniques, including
the hybrid MPM method [Han et al. 2019], position-based Cosserat
rods [Kugelstadt and Schömer 2016], and the ASFLIP scheme [Fei
et al. 2021a]. We highlight our method in a row of benchmarks
with various hairstyles. As illustrated in Fig. 1, our method can find
sag-free rest configurations for the given wavy hairstyle, for which
our simulator yields stable animations.
2
BACKGROUND
This section first briefly reviews related work, and then introduces
the hybrid hair simulation method that our approach is based on.
2.1
Related Work
Hair Dynamic Models. Hair simulation is computationally inten-
sive due to the large number of hair strands (with about 100K strands
on an average human). In practical applications, engineers typically
use a number of representative primitives to simulate hair dynamics
rather than simulating every hair. Over the years, a row of simplified
hair representations has been proposed to approximate large bun-
dles of hairs at a low cost. These include 2D strips [Koh and Huang
2001], cubic lattice representations [Volino and Magnenat-Thalmann
2006], short hair strips [Guang and Zhiyong 2002], and volumet-
ric representations [Lee et al. 2019; Wu and Yuksel 2016]. These
representations can be converted to dense hair models at render
time. In comparison to these approaches, a more prevalent modeling
technique is to simulate a small number of guiding hair strands and
then recover the dense hair model via interpolation. Early works
model hair strands using mass-spring chains [Rosenblum et al. 1991]
or rigid multi-body chains [Anjyo et al. 1992; Chang et al. 2002],
but ghost particles [Umetani et al. 2015] or altitude springs [Selle
et al. 2008] are needed to take twisting effects into account for
modeling curly hairs. Recently, researchers have devised more phys-
ically accurate models of hair strands with bending and twisting,
such as the super-helix model [Bertails et al. 2006], Cosserat rod
elements (CoRdE) [Spillmann and Teschner 2007], discrete elastic
rods (DER) [Bergou et al. 2008], damped exponential time integrator
(DETI) model [Michels et al. 2015], and position-based Cosserat
rods [Kugelstadt and Schömer 2016].
Inter-Strand Contact Models. With a large number of hairs also
comes a massive number of complex inter-strand collisions and con-
tacts. Although the frictional contact between hairs can be resolved
using explicit hair geometries [Daviet 2020; Daviet et al. 2011; Kauf-
man et al. 2014], their exhaustive contact resolution is too costly
ACM Trans. Graph., Vol. 42, No. 4, Article 1. Publication date: August 2023.


Sag-Free Initialization for Strand-Based Hybrid Hair Simulation
•
1:3
for real-time applications. In view of this, Hadap and Magnenat-
Thalmann [Hadap and Magnenat-Thalmann 2001] proposed a fluid-
inspired, hybrid formulation to resolve collisions on a background
Eulerian grid. Their result exhibits a significant speedup using a
grid resolution much coarser than the characteristic length of hair
strands. This idea has been extended to model volume-preserved
gross behavior [McAdams et al. 2009], frictional contacts [Jiang et al.
2017], and two-way coupling with fluids [Fei et al. 2017]. A com-
mon issue with hybrid formulation lies in the numerical viscosity
caused during particle-grid transfers. Han et al. [2019] proposed a
hybrid particle-grid solver to alleviate this issue. Recently, Fei et al.
[2021a] introduced the Affine-augmented Separable FLIP (ASFLIP)
scheme that utilizes both velocity and positional adjustments to
break the positional trap. Leveraging the power of GPU, the lat-
est GPU implementation can simulate hundreds of thousands of
MPM particles in real-time [Fei et al. 2021b]. In this work, we build
our efficient GPU-based hair simulator by combining ideas from
position-based Cosserat rods [Kugelstadt and Schömer 2016], hybrid
particle-grid solver using the granular Drucker–Prager rheology for
contacts [Han et al. 2019], and the ASFLIP scheme [Fei et al. 2021a].
Our forward hybrid hair simulation framework is capable of simu-
lating thousands of visually convincing hair strands in real-time.
Sag-free Initialization. Artists oftentimes design physical scenar-
ios by assuming they are in static force equilibrium. However, an
exact force equilibrium cannot be achieved without carefully tun-
ing the object’s material properties and relative rest configurations.
Without such fine-tuning, objects will gradually deviate from their
designed configurations under gravity, an artifact known as sagging.
A myriad of research has been devoted to automatically fine-tuning
physical scenarios to achieve force equilibrium. A large class of
techniques considers purely elastic objects and optimizes their rest
shapes. This method has been applied to design balloons [Skouras
et al. 2012], soft characters with actuators [Skouras et al. 2013],
deformable 3D printable objects [Chen et al. 2014; Mukherjee et al.
2018; Wang et al. 2015], rod structures [Miguel et al. 2016; Pérez
et al. 2015], and garments [Bartle et al. 2016]. To incorporate con-
tact models, Twigg and Kačić-Alesić [2011] formulated the static
equilibrium problem as a complex nonlinear global optimization to
solve for rest configurations, such as the rest length of springs, for
multiple deformable objects modeled as mass-spring systems. Ly
et al. [2018] presented a sag-free initialization method for elastic
shells with frictional contact handling. The vertices in contact are
first constrained as static, and the results are then projected onto a
convex frictional cone. Hsu et al. [2022] solve the nonlinear global
optimization problem using a two-stage global-local optimization
with a generalized formula for handling various dynamic systems,
including FEM, MPM, and Position-Based Dynamics (PBD) with
frictional contacts. Our proposed approach uses the same decompo-
sition strategy but supports Cosserat rods while constraining the
solution to avoid plastic flow for the MPM scheme, among other
stability enhancements.
Unlike prior works, our initialization method can handle hybrid
Cosserat-MPM hair dynamics. A key challenge for sag-free hair
modeling is incorporating thousands of hair-body and hair-hair
collisions in the optimization formulation. Existing hair initialization
technique relies on exhaustive hair simulation [Lee and Ko 2001]
or additional spring forces and constraints [Iben et al. 2019]. It
has been shown that, for a single hair strand modeled as a multi-
body chain, the static equilibrium state can be found using inverse
dynamics [Hadap 2006]. Derouet-Jourdan et al. [2010] proposed
an initialization approach for 2D super-helix model. Unfortunately,
all of these approaches initialize each strand separately without
considering contacts. Derouet-Jourdan et al. [2013] solves for the
inverse static equilibrium configuration with Lagrangian contact
forces as a well-posed constrained optimization problem. Their
method can initialize thousands of hair strands with contacts in
the order of a few seconds. Unfortunately, their method is designed
for the pure Lagrangian case with explicit frictional contacts. In
comparison, our approach also targets sag-free hair initialization
but for a completely different forward simulation system that is
more suitable for real-time applications. To our best knowledge, we
propose the first contact-aware sag-free initialization approach for
hybrid Lagrangian/Eulerian hair dynamics.
2.2
Hybrid Cosserat-MPM Hair Simulation
In this section, we describe the hybrid hair simulation method used.
Our algorithm is very similar to the prior hybrid work [Han et al.
2019] and takes the Lagrangian point of view and models each
hair strand as a Cosserat rod with time integration via extended
position-based dynamics (XPBD). The vertices of each hair strand
are further used as material particles in conjunction with the MPM
method to handle collisions on an auxiliary Eulerian grid. Although
such a hybrid framework has been proposed, we introduce essential
modifications to allow stable sag-free initialization, which will be
presented in the next section.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Fig. 2. Forward simulation pipeline: (a) integrate Cosserat rod us-
ing XPBD scheme to predict per-particle Lagrangian force, (b) compute
and transfer particle stress with predicted Lagrangian force to grid
nodes and update velocity at each grid node, (c) transfer velocity back
to the particle, and (d) advance particles based on the new velocity
from G2P.
We use subscript 𝑖as grid node indices, subscript 𝑝, 𝑝+, and 𝑝++
as consecutive particle indices along the hair strand, and subscript 𝑠
as indices of hair segment between consecutive particles pair 𝑝and
𝑝+. We use superscript 𝑛as timestep index. 𝛼= {1, 2, 3} indicates
the orthonormal vectors. To model twisting and bending, Cosserat
theory attaches a frame with each strand segment, denoted as a
quaternion q. q indicates the conjugate of a quaternion q and ℑ(q)
indicates the imaginary component of q. 𝛀and 𝛀0 indicate the
Darboux vector at the current and rest pose. As shown in Fig. 2, our
forward hair simulator uses a time-splitting scheme consisting of
the following steps:
ACM Trans. Graph., Vol. 42, No. 4, Article 1. Publication date: August 2023.


1:4
•
Jerry Hsu, Tongtong Wang, Zherong Pan, Xifeng Gao, Cem Yuksel, and Kui Wu
2.2.1
Cosserat Rod Integration. We adopt the PBD frame-
work [Kugelstadt and Schömer 2016] to model each hair strand as
Cosserat rods and extend it to XPBD [Macklin et al. 2016]. This
step is performed independently for each hair strand. Cosserat rods
introduce a frame q𝑠for each hair segment. As such, the 𝛼’th axis of
the frame is expressed as d𝑠,𝛼= q𝑠e𝛼q𝑠, where e𝛼are orthonormal
basis. The Cosserat dynamic is modeled with two constraints. The
stretch and shear constraint Css
𝑠ensures that the rod segment 𝑠is
nearly length-preserved and normal with the rod’s cross-section:
Css
𝑠(x𝑝, x𝑝+, q𝑠) = 1
𝑙0
(x𝑝−x𝑝+) −d𝑠,3,
(1)
with rest length 𝑙0. To model the bending and twisting behaviors,
an additional bend and twist constraint Cbt
𝑠is introduced between
two pairs of consecutive particles, quaternion of which denoted as
q𝑠and q𝑠+, to penalize the difference between the Darboux vector
𝛀at current and rest pose, which is given by:
Cbt
𝑠(q𝑠, q𝑠+) = 𝛀(q𝑠, q𝑠+) −𝜙𝛀0
𝜙=
(
+1
for ∥𝛀−𝛀0∥2 ≤∥𝛀+ 𝛀0∥2
−1
for ∥𝛀−𝛀0∥2 > ∥𝛀+ 𝛀0∥2 ,
(2)
where 𝜙is used to always move 𝛀towards the nearest pole, since
both 𝛀0 and −𝛀0 correspond to the same angle.
The energy potential 𝐸is further specified in terms of constraint
functions 𝐸★𝑠= 1
2𝑘★C★𝑠
𝑇C★𝑠, where ★indicates constraint type and
𝑘★indicates the corresponding stiffness. We can use the XPBD time
integrator to approximately solve each particle’s orientation q𝑛+1
𝑠
,
angular velocity 𝝎𝑛+1
𝑠
, temporary position ˜x𝑛+1
𝑝
, and temporary
velocity ˜v𝑛+1
𝑝
via the optimization:
˜x𝑛+1
𝑝
, ˜v𝑛+1
𝑝
, q𝑛+1
𝑠
, 𝝎𝑛+1
𝑠
≈argmin
x𝑝,v𝑝,q𝑠,𝝎𝑠
∑︁
𝑝
𝑚𝑝
2Δ𝑡2 ∥v𝑝−v𝑛
𝑝∥2+
∑︁
𝑠
1
2Δ𝑡2 ∥𝝎𝑠−𝝎𝑛
𝑠∥2
I𝑠+
∑︁
𝑠
𝐸ss
𝑠+
∑︁
𝑠
𝐸bt
𝑠,
(3)
where 𝑚𝑝is the particle mass and I𝑠is the segment inertial tensor.
To solve the optimization problem, an XPBD scheme is used to
calculate the stretch and shear iterants as:
Δ𝝀ss = 𝑙0
 x𝑝−x𝑝+ + q𝑠e3q𝑠𝑙0 −˜𝛼ss𝝀ss𝑙0

𝑤𝑝+ 𝑤𝑝+ + 𝑙2 (4𝑤𝑠+ ˜𝛼ss)
,
Δx𝑝= +Δ𝝀𝑠
𝑙0
,
Δx𝑝+ = −Δ𝝀𝑠
𝑙0
,
Δq𝑠= −2Δ𝝀𝑠q𝑠e3.
and the bend and twist iterants as:
Δ𝝀bt =
−

q𝑠q𝑠+ −𝑠𝛀0
−˜𝛼bt𝝀bt
𝑤𝑠+ 𝑤𝑠+ + ˜𝛼bt
,
Δq𝑠= q𝑠+Δ𝝀bt,
Δq𝑠+ = q𝑠Δ𝝀bt,
where 𝝀★is the Lagrange multiplier and ˜𝛼★is a block diagonal
compliance matrix corresponding to inverse stiffness. At the end
of each iteration, the rotation quaternion is normalized. We refer
readers to the previous work [Kugelstadt and Schömer 2016] for
more details on the XPBD integration of Cosserat rods.
2.2.2
Particle Stress Computation. Instead of explicitly detecting
and resolving inter-hair contacts using Lagrangian geometries, we
follow the previous hybrid hair method [Fei et al. 2021a; Han et al.
2019] to resolve the contacts on the Eulerian grid with the elastoplas-
tic MPM scheme. Like traditional MPM methods, besides position
x𝑝and velocity v𝑝, each particle carries affine coefficients C𝑝and
deformation gradient F𝑝. We treat each particle as elastoplastic
material and follow standard MPM derivation [Klár et al. 2016] to
compute the per-particle stress tensor:
𝝈𝑛
𝑝=
1
det(F𝑛𝑝)
  𝜕𝜓
𝜕F (F𝑛
𝑝)(F𝑛
𝑝)𝑇,
(4)
with the material model:
𝜓(F) = 𝜇tr((ln 𝚺)2) + 1
2𝜆tr(ln 𝚺)2 ,
(5)
where F = U𝚺V𝑇is the singular value decomposition, and 𝜇, 𝜆are
the Lamé parameters. It is worth noting that, for real-time perfor-
mance, we only resolve the contacts on the Eulerian grid, with-
out using explicit Lagrangian geometric correction for collision as
in [Han et al. 2019].
2.2.3
Particle-to-Grid (P2G) and Grid Update. After adjusting parti-
cle velocities and stress, the momentum P𝑖is then transferred from
particles to the grid nodes, where explicit force computation is used
to update grid velocity:
v𝑛
𝑖= P𝑛
𝑖/
∑︁
𝑝
𝑤𝑖𝑝𝑚𝑝.
(6)
2.2.4
Grid-to-Particle (G2P). The final step updates particles’ ve-
locity v𝑛+1
𝑝
, position x𝑛+1
𝑝
, affine coefficient C𝑛+1
𝑝
, and deformation
gradient F𝑛𝑝using the following ASFLIP scheme [Fei et al. 2021a]:
v𝑛+1
𝑝
=
∑︁
𝑖
v𝑛+1
𝑖
𝑤𝑖𝑝+ 𝛼(v𝑛
𝑝−
∑︁
𝑖
v𝑛
𝑖𝑤𝑖𝑝)
x𝑛+1
𝑝
= x𝑛
𝑝+ Δ𝑡(
∑︁
𝑖
v𝑛+1
𝑖
𝑤𝑖𝑝+ 𝛽𝑝𝛼(v𝑛
𝑝−
∑︁
𝑖
v𝑛
𝑖𝑤𝑖𝑝))
C𝑛+1
𝑝
=
4
Δ𝑥2
∑︁
𝑖
v𝑛+1
𝑖
(x𝑖−x𝑝)𝑇𝑤𝑖𝑝
˜F𝑛+1
𝑝
= F𝑛
𝑝+ Δ𝑡∇(v𝑛)𝑝F𝑛
𝑝,
(7)
where 𝛼is a velocity adjustment and 𝛽𝑝is the parameter to avoid
the position trap caused by the numerical viscosity during particle-
grid transfers. Here, 𝑤𝑖𝑝is a standard B-spline quadratic kernel.
Finally, we project ˜F𝑛+1
𝑝
to derive F𝑛+1
𝑝
satisfying the following
Drucker–Prager yielding condition:
𝑐𝐹tr(𝝈𝑛+1
𝑝
) +
𝝈𝑛+1
𝑝
−
tr(𝝈𝑛+1
𝑝
)
𝑑
F
≤0 ,
(8)
where 𝑑= 2, 3 as in 2D and 3D, and 𝑐𝐹≥0 increases with amount of
friction between grains. We refer readers to the previous work [Klár
et al. 2016] for more details on this step.
3
METHOD
This section introduces our essential modifications to the hybrid
hair simulator that enables sag-free initialization and then describes
our four-stage sag-free solver with regularization techniques.
ACM Trans. Graph., Vol. 42, No. 4, Article 1. Publication date: August 2023.


Sag-Free Initialization for Strand-Based Hybrid Hair Simulation
•
1:5
3.1
Modifications to the Forward Simulator
We have briefly described the hybrid strand-based hair simulator
in Sec. 2.2; however, the existing framework contains ambiguities
during computation, which impedes the stability of sag-free Initial-
izations.
3.1.1
Augmented Darboux Vector. The following discrete Darboux
vector suggested by Kugelstadt and Schömer [2016]:
𝛀= 2/𝑙0ℑ(q𝑠q𝑠+),
(9)
only takes the imaginary components and leads to an ambiguity
in the sign of the real part of q𝑠q𝑠+. As such, both the positive and
negative values of the real part become valid rest poses. Problemati-
cally, this does not represent the same angle but an axis-inverted
configuration instead and can be exceptionally prone to creating
instantaneous inversions of two axes as the angle between segments
approaches zero for highly bent hair. In order to resolve this ambi-
guity, we modify the definition of the discrete Darboux vector as
follows:
𝛀= 2/𝑙0(q𝑠q𝑠+),
(10)
dictating the real and imaginary parts to completely remove ambi-
guity and allow the hair to return to a unique rest shape reliably.
x𝑝
x𝑝+
x𝑝+
x𝑝
q𝑠
q𝑠
q𝑠+
q𝑠+
x𝑝++
x𝑝++
d3
d2
d1
q𝑠q𝑠+ = (0, 0,
√
2
2 , −
√
2
2 )
q𝑠q𝑠+ = (0, 0,
√
2
2 ,
√
2
2 )
Fig. 3. Those two configurations have the same discrete Darboux vec-
tor under the definition of [Kugelstadt and Schömer 2016] (ignoring
the real component), which introduces ambiguity. In practice, when
the angle between segments gets smaller, this manifests as an instan-
taneous inversion of two axes when the segments crossover.
Fig. 3 demonstrates ambiguous discrete Darboux vector suggested
by Kugelstadt and Schömer [2016], which only takes the imaginary
components. This leads to an ambiguity in the sign of the real part of
q𝑠q𝑠+, while our augmented Darboux vector resolves this ambiguity
and significantly improves the simulation quality of twisting. In
summary, there are two ambiguities at play for the discrete Darboux
vector. The first is the ambiguity between the equivalent angles of
𝑞and −𝑞within the bending and twisting constraint. The second
ambiguity lies in the sign of the missing real component in the case
of the discrete Darboux vector. Our constraint formulation flips the
sign of 𝑞to resolve the first ambiguity and we augment the Darboux
vector to resolve the second ambiguity.
3.1.2
Lagrangian/Eulerian Coupling. Unlike previous works that
directly update position x𝑛+1
𝑝
and velocity v𝑛+1
𝑝
after Cosserat rod
integration for the next frame, we use it as the temporary velocity
˜v𝑛+1
𝑝
to predict per-particle Lagrangian force f𝑛𝑝as:
f𝑛
𝑝= 𝑚𝑝( ˜v𝑛+1
𝑝
−v𝑛
𝑝)/Δ𝑡,
which is then transferred to the grid for the actual position and veloc-
ity update. This modification has two advantages. First, it prevents
hairs from exhibiting penetration during the Lagrangian update step.
Second, this later allows the contacts which, in this case, correspond
to our MPM forces to fully respond to the forces introduced by the
Lagrangian step. Note that, due to the relatively small hair radius,
we assume the hair segment’s angular velocities and rotations do
not impact MPM-hybridization. Thus, we updates q𝑛+1
𝑝
and 𝝎𝑛+1
𝑝
directly to their configurations.
In P2G, we also account for additional per-particle Lagrangian
forces f𝑝computed by the previous step using XPBD. Summing up
the contributions, the linear momentum P𝑛
𝑖of each grid node takes
the following form:
P𝑛
𝑖= Δ𝑡
∑︁
𝑝
f𝑛
𝑝𝑤𝑖𝑝−Δ𝑡
∑︁
𝑝
𝑉0
𝑝det(F𝑛
𝑝)𝝈𝑛
𝑝∇𝑤𝑖𝑝+
∑︁
𝑝
𝑤𝑖𝑝𝑚𝑝(v𝑛
𝑝+ C𝑛
𝑝(x𝑛
𝑖−x𝑛
𝑝)) + Δ𝑡g
∑︁
𝑝
𝑤𝑖𝑝𝑚𝑝,
(11)
where the first term accounts for Lagrangian forces, the second
term is the traction force, the third term uses the affine-corrected
velocity [Jiang et al. 2015], and the last term is the gravitational
force.
3.2
Sag-free Initialization
Assuming that the initial state of the hair system is quasistatic,
i.e., v0𝑝, 𝝎0𝑝, and C0𝑝are zero, the goal of the sag-free initialization
is to solve for stable rest configurations including q𝑝, F𝑝, 𝑙0, and
𝛀0, such that all future v𝑛𝑝, 𝝎𝑛𝑝, v𝑛
𝑖are zero under gravity and the
system remains quasistatic. This is a challenging problem because
our hybrid system chains these variables together into a complex
nonlinear pipeline spanning multiple systems. Our method follows
a similar idea as the two-stage approach introduced in [Hsu et al.
2022] and applies induction on the condition that v𝑛𝑝= 𝝎𝑛𝑝= v𝑛
𝑖= 0
to avoid deformation. Under this condition, all the variables become
intransient, and we can omit the superscript 𝑛without confusion.
We propose a four-stage approach:
(1) Global Force Step computes the Lagrangian force f𝑝and
the volume-scaled stress ˜𝝈𝑝= det(F𝑝)𝝈𝑝that cancel out
gravitational forces on each grid node.
(2) Local Force Step computes the rest length 𝑙0 for each stretch
and shear constraint, quaternion q for each hair segment, and
deformation gradient F𝑝for each particle based on the result
from the previous global step.
(3) Global Torque Step computes the rest Darboux vector 𝛀0
for each bend and twist constraint to cancel out the torque
produced by the quaternion q from the local-force step.
(4) Local Torque Step enforces that 𝛀0 correspond to a stable
unit quaternion under stability constraints.
We describe each of these four steps below and present our regular-
ization techniques:
ACM Trans. Graph., Vol. 42, No. 4, Article 1. Publication date: August 2023.


1:6
•
Jerry Hsu, Tongtong Wang, Zherong Pan, Xifeng Gao, Cem Yuksel, and Kui Wu
3.2.1
Global Force Step. Thanks to our Lagrangian force transfer
scheme in Eq. 11, we can utilize the grid momentum to solve for the
hair static equilibrium state. In particular, our inductive condition
implies the third term in Eq. 11 evaluates to zero, and P𝑖= 0;
otherwise, the G2P step would produce non-zero velocities. Put
together, and we have the following expression for each node 𝑖:
0 =
∑︁
𝑝
f𝑝𝑤𝑖𝑝−
∑︁
𝑝
𝑉0
𝑝det(F𝑝)𝝈𝑝∇𝑤𝑖𝑝+ g
∑︁
𝑝
𝑤𝑖𝑝𝑚𝑝.
(12)
The Lagrangian force f𝑝on each particle is the summation of
stretch and shear forces contributed by each neighboring segment
as f𝑝= Í
𝑝∈𝑠fss
𝑠, where 𝑝can be either particle of segment 𝑠and
stretch and shear force fss
𝑠= −𝜕𝐸ss
𝑠(x𝑝, x𝑝+)/𝜕x𝑝.
Among infinitely many solutions that can lead to quasistatic
configurations, we encourage small Lagrangian force f𝑝and the
volume-scaled stress ˜𝝈𝑝under the quasistatic constraint since those
forces/stresses are related to the user-input material model and
should be unaltered as much as possible. More importantly, we can-
not accept just any ˜𝝈𝑝due to the Drucker-Prager yielding condition,
and violating that would lead to plastic flow. Unfortunately, directly
solving Eq. 12 with the above constraints for rest configurations in
𝐸ss and deformation gradient F𝑝in 𝝈𝑝is a non-convex optimization
problem, due to the Cosserat rod model (Eq. 1, 2) and the hypere-
lastic material model (Eq. 5). Even worse, the optimization would
be large-scale and involves all the hair segments, making a direct
numerical optimization prohibitively costly.
We propose a novel convexification technique to boost perfor-
mance significantly. Our idea is to leave the material model out of
the optimization and use the per-segment force fss
𝑠and per parti-
cle volume-scaled stress ˜𝝈𝑝as the decision variables to solve the
following Second-Order Conic Programming (SOCP):
argmin
˜𝝈𝑝,fss
𝑠
∑︁
𝑠
fss
𝑠
2 + 𝛼
∑︁
𝑝
∥˜𝝈𝑝∥2
s.t.
∑︁
𝑝
f𝑝𝑤𝑖𝑝−
∑︁
𝑝
𝑉0
𝑝˜𝝈𝑝∇𝑤𝑖𝑝+ g
∑︁
𝑝
𝑤𝑖𝑝𝑚𝑝= 0
∀𝑖
𝑐𝐹tr( ˜𝝈𝑝) +
 ˜𝝈𝑝−tr( ˜𝝈𝑝)
𝑑
F
≤0
∀𝑝,
(13)
where 𝛼= 1𝑒−2 is a scaling factor used to bias for contacts. Note that
the second constraint is equivalent to the Drucker–Prager yielding
condition (Eq. 8), where det(F𝑝) is positive due to our hyperelastic
material model. Although Eq. 13 is still large-scale, there exists
an efficient splitting algorithm [O’Donoghue et al. 2016] to solve
such a SOCP. Similar to the global-local algorithm [Hsu et al. 2022],
O’Donoghue et al. [2016] factorizes the global matrix only once
and then uses local steps to satisfy each conic constraint. In the
Appendix A, we show that Eq. 13 is always feasible.
3.2.2
Local Force Step. Given the per-segment force fss
𝑠from global
step and per-particle volume-scaled stress ˜𝝈𝑝, we can solve the
inverse problem to recover rest configurations for each hair segment
and particle in parallel.
Local step for fss
𝑠. Given the fss
𝑠, the local step aims to find the rest
length 𝑙0 for the stretch and shear constraint so that it can produce
a matching force. However, only tuning 𝑙0 would expose one degree
of freedom, so the force can be only along the segment direction,
while fss
𝑠can be arbitrarily given by the optimization in Eq. 13. To
match the degree of freedom, we must put the rest orientation q𝑠
as the additional tunable parameter. To find 𝑙0 and q𝑠such that:
fss
𝑠= 𝑘ss
𝑙0
 x𝑝−x𝑝+
𝑙0
−d𝑠,3

,
we notice that d𝑠,3 must be a unit vector, i.e.:
∥d𝑠,3∥2 =

𝑙0fss
𝑠
𝑘ss −x𝑝−x𝑝+
𝑙0

2
= 1.
(14)
The above equation is bi-quadratic in𝑙0 , which could lead to multiple
solutions for 𝑙0. We choose the solution that is closest to the current
segment length. After 𝑙0 is computed, we solve for q𝑠that rotates
e𝑠,3 to d𝑠,3. Unfortunately, given fss
𝑠, there is no guarantee that Eq. 14
has a solution since the magnitude of compressive forces generated
by Eq. 14 is upper-bounded by definition. To ensure the solvability,
we could introduce the following hard constraint to Eq. 13 that
ensures the discriminant of Eq. 14 is positive:
 
(x𝑝−x𝑝+)𝑇fss
𝑠
(𝑘ss)2
+ 1
!2
−4 ||x𝑝−x𝑝+ ||2||fss
𝑠||2
(𝑘ss)2
≥0
∀𝑠.
(15)
Although the above hard constraint is a rotated quadratic cone
and can be readily handled by the splitting solver, enforcing it in
the global step often leads to no solution depending on the given
initial shape. Hence, we do not enforce that constraint in the global
step. Instead, we adjust the stiffness in the local step to ensure the
discriminant of Eq. 14 is positive and then solve for 𝑙0.
Local step for ˜𝝈𝑝. Given ˜𝝈𝑝, we can recover F𝑝based on the
hyperelastic material model defined in Eq. 5. Given the SVD decom-
position of ˜𝝈𝑝= U ˜𝚺𝑝V, the U, V component must be the same as
those of F𝑝. We analytically solve for the diagonal component of
ln(𝚺) via the following linear system:
diag(ln 𝚺) =
h
2𝑉0
𝑝𝜇I + 𝑉0
𝑝𝜆11𝑇i−1
diag( ˜𝚺𝑝),
where 1 is the all-one vector. We can then recover F𝑝as F𝑝=
U exp(ln 𝚺)V𝑇.
3.2.3
Global Torque Step. While the node force is canceled out in
the local-force step, additional torque can be induced by stretch
and shear energy 𝐸ss
𝑠, denoted as 𝝉ss
𝑠. Here we use 4D generalized
torque associated with an energy 𝐸★𝑠defined as: 𝝉★𝑠= −𝜕𝐸★/q𝑠. To
prevent the hair segment from rotating, we solve the second global
step on each hair strand to achieve torque equilibrium. In particular,
we solve the temporary rest orientation ˜𝛀0,𝑠for segment 𝑠, such
that stretch and shear torque is canceled out by the twist and bend
torque for each hair segment 𝑠
𝝉ss
𝑠+
∑︁
𝑠
𝝉bt
𝑠( ˜𝛀0) = 0
∀𝑠,
(16)
where 𝝉bt
𝑠denotes the torque from the bend and twist constraint,
which is linearly related to ˜𝛀0 (we ignore 𝑠for brevity). The gener-
alized torque we solve in this step is temporary because it does not
satisfy the unity constraint: ∥𝑙0𝛀0/2∥= 1. In the next step, we will
show how to adjust ˜𝛀0 to yield unit 𝛀0 without violating Eq. 16.
ACM Trans. Graph., Vol. 42, No. 4, Article 1. Publication date: August 2023.


Sag-Free Initialization for Strand-Based Hybrid Hair Simulation
•
1:7
𝑝
𝑠
𝑝+
𝑠+
𝑝++
Fig. 4. We illustrate the cone
(blue), in which 𝑠0,+ must stays
to avoid flipping of elements.
3.2.4
Local Torque Step. In
the local stage, we then need
to adjust ˜𝛀0 to 𝛀0 by ensur-
ing ∥𝑙0𝛀0/2∥= 1. Further-
more, this needs to be done
while maintaining the zero net
torque condition. Interestingly,
for the consecutive segments
𝑠and 𝑠+, any 4D generalized
torque along q𝑠q𝑠+ would gen-
erate zero 3D torque. Hence,
there is always an orthogonal
decomposition of 𝛀0 = 𝛀0,∥+
𝛀0,⊥such that 𝛀0,∥= 𝑡q𝑠q𝑠+
does not generate any torque for any real scaler 𝑡. For the derivation,
please refer to Appendix B.
Therefore, we could choose a scalar 𝑡such that 𝛀0 is a unit quater-
nion. However, an arbitrary 𝛀0 can lead to an unstable dynamic
system in two cases. First, Cbt relies on a non-smooth jump function
𝜙, which changes abruptly when the difference between ∥𝛀−𝛀0∥
and ∥𝛀+ 𝛀0∥is close to zero. To avoid such abrupt change, we
need to choose 𝛀0 that leaves enough margin between the two
values. Thus, we solve for the most stable 𝛀0 via the following local
optimization:
argmax
∥𝛀0 ∥=1,𝑡
|∥𝛀−𝛀0∥2 −∥𝛀+ 𝛀0∥2|
(17)
s.t.
𝜙𝛀0 = ˜𝛀0,⊥+ 𝑡q𝑠q𝑠+,
where 𝑡is an auxiliary variable. A second unstable case happens
when the segment 𝑠+ at its current- and rest-pose lies on two sides
of segment 𝑠. To keep these two poses on the same side of segment
𝑠, we need the following additional constraint as shown in Fig. 4:
∥𝛀⊥∥≤min

ℜ(𝛀), 2(1 −𝜖𝑏)
𝑙0

,
(18)
for some small constant margin 𝜖𝑏. Unfortunately, given the ˜𝛀0
solved from the global-torque step, no remaining degree of freedom
can be used to satisfy Eq. 18. Hence, we enforce the above constraint
by raising the bending stiffness locally until Eq. 18 is met. Then, we
can use the new ∥𝛀⊥∥to solve Eq. 17 for the final unit quaternion
𝛀0. In Appendix B, we derive the constraint in detail, provide a
closed-form solution for Eq. 17, and show that it is always feasible
given sufficiently large stiffness 𝑘bt.
3.2.5
Regularization. In practice, the simple regularization from
Eq. 13 can yield unsatisfactory solutions. This is because, for the
Lagrangian force, we would like to penalize bending forces more
than stretching forces since relying on bending force often leads to
undesirable rest configuration as shown in Fig. 5. Regarding stretch-
ing force, we prefer tension forces over compression forces because
compression forces can result in follow-up bending along indefinite
directions. But the stretching stiffness of hair is often several magni-
tudes larger than the bending stiffness, which results in a relatively
small pocket of stability in the case of compression. To alleviate
this issue, we design an asymmetric regularization technique for
the global force step.
Initial shape
Ours w/o regularization Ours w/ regularization
Fig. 5. Given the initial rod (right), without Lagrangian force regu-
larization, we will get a rest configuration that relies on bending forces
to support itself, which is demonstrated by simulating the rod without
gravity (middle). Unfortunately, this bent shape is on the saddle point
and easy to deform. By penalizing bending forces more than stretching
forces, we get a more stable rest shape (right).
We first decompose fss
𝑠into tangent and normal components:
fss
𝑠= t𝑠𝑧𝑡
𝑠+ n𝑠𝑧𝑛
𝑠,
(19)
where n𝑠= (x𝑝−x𝑝+)/∥x𝑝−x𝑝+ ∥is the tangent direction and t𝑠
are the two normal directions. We then decompose 𝑧𝑛𝑠into positive
and negative components via the following constraints:
𝑧𝑛
𝑠= 𝑧𝑛+
𝑠
+ 𝑧𝑛−
𝑠
∧𝑧𝑛+
𝑠
≥0 ∧𝑧𝑛−
𝑠
≤0.
(20)
For similar reasons, it would be better to use hydrostatic stress z𝑑𝑝
(diagonal part) over deviatoric stress z𝑜
𝑑(off-diagonal part) of ˜𝝈𝑝,
so we use the following decomposition:
˜𝝈𝑝= z𝑑
𝑝+ z𝑜
𝑝.
(21)
To enforce asymmetric regularization, we add Eq. 19, 20, 21 to Eq. 13
and replace the objective function with:
𝑤𝑡∑︁
𝑠
(𝑧𝑛+
𝑠)2 + 𝑤𝑐∑︁
𝑠
(𝑧𝑛−
𝑠
−𝑧𝑛−★
𝑠
)2 + 𝑤𝑏∑︁
𝑠
∥𝑧𝑡
𝑠∥2
+ 𝑤𝑑∑︁
∥z𝑑
𝑝∥2 + 𝑤𝑜∑︁
∥z𝑜
𝑝∥2,
(22)
where 𝑧𝑡𝑠, 𝑧𝑛±
𝑠, z𝑑𝑝, and z𝑜𝑝are our new decision variables, and we
use 𝑤𝑡= 1, 𝑤𝑐= 104, 𝑤𝑏= 104, 𝑤𝑑= 103, 𝑤𝑜= 105 in all our
experiments. We also regulate using a bias value 𝑧𝑛−★
𝑠
. Empirically,
we find setting 𝑧𝑛−★
𝑠
to be half the weight of a hair strand to yield
good results.
4
RESULTS
We implement our sag-free initialization via C++ using the Splitting
Conic Solver (SCS) [O’Donoghue 2021] and our forward hair simu-
lation based on a CUDA MPM implementation [Gao et al. 2018]. All
timings are measured on a desktop machine with a 3.4 GHz AMD
Ryzen 9 5950X CPU and an NVIDIA GeForce RTX 3090 GPU with
24 GB of memory, except forward simulation time and sag-free ini-
tialization time for the “Curly wig” hairstyle measured on a desktop
machine with a 3.7 GHz AMD Ryzen Threadripper 3970X CPU and
an NVIDIA GeForce RTX 3090 GPU with 256 GB of memory.
To verify the practicality of our method, we export four hairstyles
from MetaHuman in Unreal Engine. Given the hairstyle (full hairs),
we first randomly pick either 256 or 512 hair strands and uniformly
sample 16 particles per hair strand as guide hairs for sag-free ini-
tialization and forward simulation. Meanwhile, we build an interpo-
lation weight map between guide hairs and full hairs based on their
initial relative position. With the weight map, we reconstruct the
ACM Trans. Graph., Vol. 42, No. 4, Article 1. Publication date: August 2023.


1:8
•
Jerry Hsu, Tongtong Wang, Zherong Pan, Xifeng Gao, Cem Yuksel, and Kui Wu
Frame 100
Frame 300
Frame 500
Frame 700
Discrete Darboux vector [Kugelstadt and Schömer 2016]
Ours augmented Darboux vector
Fig. 6. Twisting rod: Comparison between discrete Darboux vector
(top) and our augmented Darboux vector (bottom). Our Darboux vector
definition uses both the real and imaginary parts to remove ambiguity
and improve curvature smoothness.
Discrete Darboux vector
Ours augmented Darboux vector
Frame 1
Frame 30
Frame 300
Frame 1
Frame 30
Frame 300
Fig. 7. Zig-zag rod: Our method can initialize the sag-free rod based
on either the discrete Darboux vector (left) or our augmented Darboux
vector (right) in bend and twist constraints. The Zig-Zag rod that uses
the discrete Darboux vector cannot recover after being blown by the
wind due to the ambiguity in the Darboux vector computation. The
arrow indicates the force direction.
full hair at render time based on the new guide hair positions. Fig. 1
shows an example hairstyle with both guide and full hairs.
In the forward simulation, we use 64 iterations for each XPBD
step with a time step size of Δ𝑡= 10−3. Thanks to our GPU imple-
mentation and efficient inter-hair contact handling over the grid, it
only takes 0.9 ms per timestep, including 64 XPBD iterations and
one MPM collision step, which makes the strand-based hair sim-
ulation accessible for real-time applications. Note that since our
vertices and grid size are relatively small, the reported simulation
time is dominated by the CUDA kernel launch overheads and can
be subject to further optimizations.
Fig. 6 shows that our augmented Darboux vector can significantly
improve the simulation quality of the twisting rod. Furthermore,
Fig. 7 demonstrates the ambiguity caused by the discrete Darboux
vector for sag-free initialization. The Zig-zag rods are modeled by
the bend and twist constraints based on either the discrete Darboux
vector (left) or our augmented Darboux vector (right). Although our
method can initialize both rods with a sag-free initial pose under
gravity, the rod with the discrete Darboux vector cannot recover its
initial shape after being blown by the wind due to the ambiguity in
the Darboux vector definition.
Fig. 8 demonstrates the importance of enforcing yielding condi-
tions during initializing a cluster of hairs lying on another bunch
initially. With either naive initialization or if we solve static equilib-
Naive
Without enforcing
yielding constraint
Ours final
Fig. 8. Drape: A cluster of hair strands laying on another cluster
initially. With either naive initialization (left) or if we solve the static
equilibrium state without considering Drucker–Prager yielding con-
dition (middle), hair strands slide down when the simulation starts,
while our initialization (right) can correctly solve inter-hair frictional
contacts and preserve the initial shape under the gravity.
Naive
Ours
Gravity only
Under wind
Wind direction
Wind direction
Fig. 9. Curly wig: We evaluate our method on the “Curly wig”
hairstyle extracted from the same data used in the prior work [Derouet-
Jourdan et al. 2013] with a similar number of hair strands. Using the
naive initialization (top row), the hairstyle breaks as soon as the simula-
tion starts due to the large sagging artifacts. Our sag-free initialization
(bottom row) can preserve the designed hairstyle while having similar
hair dynamics under blowing wind (right).
rium state without considering Drucker–Prager yielding condition,
hair strands slide down after the simulation starts.
ACM Trans. Graph., Vol. 42, No. 4, Article 1. Publication date: August 2023.


Sag-Free Initialization for Strand-Based Hybrid Hair Simulation
•
1:9
Guide hairs
Full hairs
z                                                                              }|                                                                              {
z                                                                              }|                                                                              {
Naive
[Hsu et al. 2022]
Ours
Naive
[Hsu et al. 2022]
Ours
Fig. 10. Long: The “Long” hairstyles initialized with the naive method, the previous sag-free initialization approach [Hsu et al. 2022], and ours
behave very similarly under the wind from the left. The left is the guide hairs used for the actual initialization and simulation, and the right shows
the full hairs interpolated from the guide hairs.
Naive
Ours
Guide hairs
Front
Back
Under wind
Fig. 11. Afro: We show the guide hairs (leftmost), the front (second
leftmost), and back (second rightmost) views of full hairs under gravity,
where naive initialization causes significant volume loss while ours
can preserve the given hair shape. Meanwhile, our result (rightmost)
behaves very similarly to that of the naive method under the wind
force blowing from the left.
To compare with the prior work [Derouet-Jourdan et al. 2013], we
perform sag-free initialization on the same hairstyle (Fig. 9) with a
similar number of hair strands (1024). Since their work uses explicit
contact handling while ours uses an inter-hair Eulerian grid, there is
no clear way to match the exact number of contacts. In our setup, we
use 32 particles per strand with a grid size of 1283, leading to 32555
occupied voxels. Since our system has six unknown variables for
each deformation gradient per particle and seven unknown variables
for constraints associated with per hair segment, we have a total
of 323584 unknown variables to solve for in our initialization step,
a much larger problem size than the prior work [Derouet-Jourdan
et al. 2013]. Even with a larger system to solve, our method can
still successfully initialize this challenging curly hairstyle without
sagging in 606.4 seconds. More importantly, it only takes 1.3 ms
per step to simulate the hybrid system with 1024 hair strands and
32768 particles, which shows the superiority of our frameworks
over previous methods.
To compare with another previous work [Hsu et al. 2022], we
use one step of the global-local solver to only solve for net force
Naive
Ours
Gravity only
Under blowing wind
Fig. 12. Short: We evaluate our method on one “Short” hairstyle.
With the naive initialization (top row), the hairstyles break as soon
as the simulation starts. Our sag-free initialization (bottom row) can
preserve the designed hairstyles while having similar hair dynamics
under blowing wind (right).
in the “Long” example. Unfortunately, since the prior method does
not consider the net torque and cannot support bend and twist
constraints with quaternions and the Darboux vector, the hairstyle
initialized via the prior method breaks as soon as the simulation
starts (Fig. 1) as it does in the naive initialization. Fig. 10 further
demonstrates that all results present similar hair dynamics under
the blowing wind.
We further evaluate our method on three additional hairstyles,
including Afro (Fig. 11), Short (Fig. 12), and Middle (Fig. 14). Without
the correct sag-free initialization, the hairstyles deform once the sim-
ulation starts and significantly change the avatars’ appearances. Our
sag-free initialization preserves the designed hairstyles. “Long” and
“Middle” demonstrate our method with long hairstyles that contain
large overhangs in both the front and the back. “Afro” demonstrates
our approach can also work well for highly intertwined volumetric
hair.
Additionally, we use two common human head motions, head-
turning (Fig. 13) and dance (Fig. 14), to evaluate the simulation
quality of “Long” and “Middle”. As shown in Fig. 13, the hairstyle
ACM Trans. Graph., Vol. 42, No. 4, Article 1. Publication date: August 2023.


1:10
•
Jerry Hsu, Tongtong Wang, Zherong Pan, Xifeng Gao, Cem Yuksel, and Kui Wu
Naive
Ours
Fig. 13. Head-turning: We evaluate our method on the curly hairstyle with a moderate head-turning motion. Our sag-free initialization (top
row) can produce similar visual results as the one with naive initialization (bottom row) does while preserving the bangs.
Naive
Ours
Fig. 14. Dance: We further evaluate our result on the “Middle” hairstyle with an aggressive dance motion of the head. The Leftmost demonstrates
the guide hairs used for initialization and simulation, while the rest are the corresponding full hairs in the dance sequence. The hairs with naive
initialization (top row) cannot preserve the initialization and lead to intertwined (second rightmost), while ours (bottom row) has a much better
visual quality.
initialized with our method allows us to preserve both the initial
shape under static equilibrium and the dynamic motion under ani-
mation. The dynamics under motion remain visually similar, both
with and without our initialization. Note that Fig. 14 shows that with-
out our initialization, hairs become universally too soft to preserve
the hairstyle and later excessively intertwine with each other due to
the aggressive head motions. We list all physical parameters, input
parameters, and their resulting initialization metrics in Table 1. We
show the percentage of elements where material modifications take
place. Generally, hairstyles with curly hair exhibit more significant
local stiffening. In particular, any hairstyle or segment positioned
horizontally to gravity requires additional stiffening. This is often
required when sweeping strands on the forehead or extremely curly
hair. We also list the equilibrium condition residual as force (in
Newtons) mean squared error (MSE) in Table 1.
To evaluate the scalability of our method, we initialize the “Curly
wig” with 128, 256, 512, and 1024 hair strands and 643, 643, 1283,
and 1283 grid sizes, respectively. As shown in Fig. 15, the initial-
ization takes 27, 91, 129, and 606 seconds for different numbers
of hair strands, where we observe a roughly quadratic scaling in
initialization time as the number of hair strands increases under the
same grid size. In terms of the forward simulation, thanks to our
GPU-friendly implementation, it only takes 0.75, 0.78, 1.16, and 1.30
ms per step, respectively. The forward simulation performance is
highly related to the grid size as the MPM update dominates the
computation performance, and the Lagrangian rod integration is
reasonably fast. It is worth noting that our system can initialize up
ACM Trans. Graph., Vol. 42, No. 4, Article 1. Publication date: August 2023.
