Title: Bcnet: Learning body and cloth shape from a single image

BCNet: Learning Body and Cloth Shape from A
Single Image
Boyi Jiang1, Juyong Zhang1⋆, Yang Hong1, Jinhao Luo1, Ligang Liu1, and
Hujun Bao2
1 University of Science and Technology of China
2 State Key Lab of CAD&CG, Zhejiang University
Abstract. In this paper, we consider the problem to automatically re-
construct garment and body shapes from a single near-front view RGB
image. To this end, we propose a layered garment representation on top
of SMPL and novelly make the skinning weight of garment independent
of the body mesh, which signiﬁcantly improves the expression ability of
our garment model. Compared with existing methods, our method can
support more garment categories and recover more accurate geometry.
To train our model, we construct two large scale datasets with ground
truth body and garment geometries as well as paired color images. Com-
pared with single mesh or non-parametric representation, our method can
achieve more ﬂexible control with separate meshes, makes applications
like re-pose, garment transfer, and garment texture mapping possible.
Code and some data is available at https://github.com/jby1993/BCNet.
Keywords: clothed body reconstruction, 3D garment shape, 3D body
shape, skinning weight
1
Introduction
Applications like virtual try-on, VR/AR, and entertainment need detailed and
accurate reconstruction of both body and dressed garments with simple input
like color image. However, the variety of body shapes, postures and garment
categories, makes it a very challenging problem. A simulation-based method [52]
explores this problem, but their solution is dedicated and time-consuming. In
this paper, we aim to automatically reconstruct both body and cloth shapes
from just a single near-front view image, utilizing the powerful ﬁtting ability of
the deep neural network.
In recent years, body shape reconstruction from images has made signiﬁcant
progress [23,36,24,29]. A common way is to infer the shape and pose parameter of
a statistical body model, like SMPL [32]. These methods are robust for diﬀerent
posture, but the reconstructed geometry is constrained to be within the model
space, which can not capture the complex cloth shape.
⋆Corresponding author. Email: juyong@ustc.edu.cn.
arXiv:2004.00214v2  [cs.CV]  3 Aug 2020


2
B. Jiang et al.
To infer detailed geometry beyond body shape, some non-parametric repre-
sentations have been proposed [46,57,35,43]. These non-parametric representa-
tions based on voxel and implicit function can recover arbitrary shapes. However,
voxel representation is hard to recover shape details due to their large memory
consumption for high resolution. Although implicit representation is more mem-
ory eﬃcient, it may generate infeasible results like broken arms. Moreover, the
lack of semantic information limits their applications like garment transfer.
Expanding the representation ability of the statistical model of body shape is
another solution. Several prior works [7,38,3,4] utilize the vertex displacements
of body shape represented by SMPL to represent garment geometry. Under this
conﬁguration, tight garments can be reconstructed. However, this representation
cannot recover the feature of garment edges. More importantly, binding garments
with SMPL points causes the problem that garments have the same skinning
weights and connectivity with SMPL. Therefore, large scale displacements of
loose garments may cause artifacts because of inappropriate skinning weights.
More importantly, garments like skirts which have a diﬀerent topology with body
shape, are beyond the representation range.
Like Bhatnagar et al. [7], we train a model to reconstruct body mesh and
layered garment meshes separately. The diﬀerence in input is that our method
only requires a single RGB image and no additional semantic information and
body rough A-pose constrain. Another diﬀerence is that our garment mesh is not
bound with the body mesh, and can reconstruct more garment categories. To
this end, we address three major challenges: learning a shared skinning weight
network for all garments, garment detail inference, and dataset construction.
Our method supports six garment categories, including upper garment, pants,
and skirts with short and long templates for each type. For all garment types,
we train a network to predict skinning weights related to SMPL’s skeleton. For
each type, we use graph convolution to recover the details. To train the model,
a dataset with various RGB images and their corresponding body and cloth
shapes is needed. However, there is no available public datasets that satisfy our
demands. Instead, for each type of garment, we design diﬀerent sizes of clothes
dressed on diﬀerent SMPL neutral bodies and repose these clothes to various
postures utilizing a physics engine. Besides, a commercial 3D human dataset
with high-deﬁnition texture is added to increase the diversity of training data.
Our method can infer both body and garment shapes from a single image
with diﬀerent poses, and also supports loose garment types, like skirts. Based
on the reconstruction results by our method, applications like garments and
poses transferring between diﬀerent images can be achieved. In summary, the
contributions of this work include the following aspects:
– We present a novel garment representation on top of SMPL and a neural
network-based method to reconstruct the shapes of body and garment from
a single near-front viewpoint color image.
– Rather than binding the skinning weight of garment with body mesh, we
propose a generic skinning weights generating network, which enables our
approach to support garments with diﬀerent topologies.


BCNet
3
– We design a complete algorithm pipeline for dressed SMPL body data con-
struction with diﬀerent types of garments. The constructed dataset, includ-
ing synthetic images and clothed body shapes, will be publicly available.
2
Related Work
Template-Free Clothed Human Estimation. Some non-parametric meth-
ods based on voxel or implicit function have been proposed to address the com-
plex topology of garments. BodyNet [46] directly infers a voxel representation of
clothed bodies with a deep network. Due to the large memory cost for high reso-
lution, high-frequency details are often missed. Jackson et al. [20] reconstruct the
shape of humans via volumetric regression and show the ability to output ﬁne-
scale details. Zheng et al. [57] infer clothed body volume representation with an
initial aligned SMPL body, and combine image features to enhance reconstruc-
tion details. Natsume et al. [35] propose a reconstruction method based on a
multi-view framework using synthesizing new silhouettes from a single image.
More recently, [43] proposes a promising clothed body reconstruction network
using a memory-eﬃcient implicit representation. Template-free methods do not
utilize the human body prior to obtain complex topology modeling ability, at
the cost of lacking semantic information and control of reconstructed results.
Template-Based Clothed Human Estimation. Based on human body sta-
tistical model [32,5,21], many works can estimate naked body shape from im-
age [23,27,38,36,9,14,54]. For better representation ability, a displacement vector
is added for each vertex. [3,1,2] adopt this strategy to reconstruct clothed body
with skin-tight garment. Alldieck et al. [4] estimate detailed normal and vector
displacement on the UV map, which leads to ﬁner-scale details. Zhu et al. [59]
model ﬁne-scale details by adding free-form 3D deformation on top of parametric
model. Instead of using a single surface to represent both garment and body, [7]
separates SMPL mesh to represent upper garment and pant independently, lead-
ing to more ﬂexible control. However, binding garment vertices to body model
strictly restricts the topology of support garment categories, and it is hard to
represent more loose garment types, such as skirts.
[39,55] also use separate
body and garment templates to register clothed body motion sequences.
Garment Dataset Construction. BUFF [56] supplies high-quality 4D scans
of clothed bodies, but it only has 5 subjects and 2 suits for each subject. Lah-
ner et al. [26] collect high-quality 4D scans of garments, but the method leaves
out body reconstruction, and their dataset is not publicly available. Recently, [7]
constructs a training dataset with garment and body shapes from real scan data,
but the training dataset is also unavailable. Moreover, many prior works generate
ground truth dataset based on physics-based simulation [29,28,44,49,12,17,40].
[29,28] dress SMPL bodies and construct more truthful images than SURREAL [47].
[49] simulates three types of garment and dress them on neutral SMPL bodies
to learn garments design from sketches. All mentioned datasets do not meet our
requirements. Therefore, we build a dataset containing a variety of garments and
body types with diﬀerent sizes and postures.


4
B. Jiang et al.
Fig. 1. The architecture of our proposed network. The CNN encodes image into latent
feature, then we get reconstructed SMPL parameters ˆβ, ˆθ, ˆt and shared garment latent
feature l with respective FC layers. From l, we reconstruct garment shape parameter ˆα
and garment type scores {ˆu, ˆd} for upper and lower garment separately. With the clas-
siﬁer, ˆα and ˆβ, we reconstruct neutral clothed body. Followed a displacement network
and skinning weight network, we predict garment vertex displacements and skinning
weights separately. Finally, utilizing predicted pose parameters ˆθ, ˆt and
ˆ
Wg, we re-pose
neutral body and garments with displacements to reference posture.
Garment Deformation Representation. How to represent the deformation
of a garment is also related to our work. De Aguiar et al. [13] represent the gar-
ment dynamic dressed on a speciﬁc virtual avatar with a linear combination of
pre-computed multiple deformations. DRAPE [17] regresses garment deforma-
tion from body shape with a technique derived from SCAPE [5]. Xu et al. [50]
combine rotation and translation weights to approximate the non-local and non-
linear clothing deformation and introduce a pose sensitive rigging scheme. Lah-
ner et al. [26] recover high-frequency garment details from a normal map created
from Generative Adversarial Network. Yang et al. [51] model garments with dif-
ferent connectivity based on a body template and use PCA to parameterize
garment deformation. Santesteban et al. [44] propose to deform base garment
conditioned on body parameters and then add high-frequency wrinkles.
3
Algorithm
The target of this work is to automatically reconstruct both body and cloth
shapes from a single near-front view image. Our model currently supports six
garment categories and can be easily extended to other new types. In the fol-
lowing, we ﬁrst describe our garment representation model. Then, we introduce
our network structure and training loss design.
3.1
Garment Model
We use SMPL [32] as our parametric human body model. SMPL is a function
which maps shape parameters β ∈R10 and pose parameters θ ∈R72 to a body


BCNet
5
mesh Mb(β, θ) ∈R3|Vb|, where Vb is SMPL mesh vertices set. The mapping can
be summarized as the following equation:
Mb(β, θ) = W (Tb(β, θ), J(β), θ, Wb),
Tb(β, θ) = B + Bsβ + Bpθ,
(1)
where SMPL applies linear displacement bases Bs and Bp on a T-posed template
mesh B, and then utilize standard skeleton skinning operation W to get posed
body mesh. J(β) ∈R24×3 is SMPL body’s neutral skeleton and Wb ∈R|Vb|×24
is the skinning weights of each vertex of SMPL.
As most clothes follow the deformations of the body, we compute our garment
mesh Mg ∈R3|Vg| similarly based on the skin deformation of SMPL:
Mg(α, β, θ, D) = W (Tg(α, D), J(β), θ, Wg(α, β)),
Tg(α, D) = G+Bgα+D.
(2)
For each garment category, a T-posed template mesh G is deﬁned. On top of the
base mesh, we add linear displacement deformation Bg controlled by PCA coeﬃ-
cients α ∈R64. This low dimensional representation is eﬀective in capturing size
variations of a speciﬁc garment category under T-pose. To deform garments with
dressed SMPL body, we share garment pose parameter θ with SMPL and use
SMPL’s skeleton J(β) as the binding skeleton of the garment. Instead of directly
using the skinning weights of SMPL, a neural network is utilized to estimate the
skinning weights Wg of the garment. This design makes garment mesh indepen-
dent with SMPL mesh and makes our garment model can support more garment
topology than SMPL+D methods [7,38,3], if providing corresponding garment
training data. To capture variations caused by diﬀerent pose and interaction be-
tween clothing and body, we add a high-frequency displacement D ∈R3|Vg| for
vertices of the clothing. In this paper, for the conciseness of writing symbol, we
denote the displacement directly as D instead of a function of latent dependent
variables, such as α, θ.
3.2
Image to Dressed Body
Given a near-front view RGB image depicting a posed subject dressed on spe-
ciﬁc garments, our model estimates its body shape, pose parameters and global
translation with ˆβ ∈R10, ˆθ ∈R72,ˆt ∈R3 and the garment parameters ˆα ∈R64
and ˆD. Our model mainly consists of four modules: image encoder, classiﬁcation
module, skinning weight network, and displacement network. Fig. 1 shows our
algorithm pipeline, and we will discuss the details of the last two modules.
Our image encoder uses the feature extraction of ResNet-18 [19] and average
pooling the ﬁnal feature map to 8×8 size. From the map, a fully connected layer
is used to get the latent feature. Then, four fully connected layers are used to
predict shape parameters ˆβ, pose parameters ˆθ, translation ˆt and shared garment
latent feature l ∈R256. For pose parameters, instead of directly predicting the
axis-angle representation parameters ˆθ, we predict vectorized rotation matrices
R ˆ
(θ) ∈R24×9 of all joints, where R is the Rodrigues rotation transformation.
This strategy makes training more stable and continuous [27,37,38].


6
B. Jiang et al.
From shared garment latent l, two fully connected layers are used to predict
upper and lower garment classify scores ˆu ∈R2 and ˆd ∈R4 separately. Then, we
concatenate ˆβ and l as input of a two-layer Multi-layer perceptron(MLP) [41]
to predict neutral garment shape parameters ˆα. After that, utilizing skinning
weight and displacement networks, we get garment skinning weights
ˆ
Wg and
high-frequency displacements ˆD, respectively. Finally, with predicted pose pa-
rameters, we can reconstruct the body shapes and dressed garments together.
3.3
Skinning Weight Network
It is an open problem to estimate skinning weights for an arbitrary character
given a binding skeleton hierarchy. Recently, Liu et al. [30] proposed the ﬁrst
generic network to infer the skinning weights of various characters binding to
the mutative skeleton hierarchy. Inspired by [30], we design our skinning weight
network to infer weights for neutral garments, and the network makes weights
computation fast, diﬀerentiable and garment type independent.
Our network predicts the skinning weights of a speciﬁc neutral garment
Tg(ˆα, 0) binding to the skeleton J of corresponding neutral SMPL body Tb(ˆβ, 0).
We compute all distances of each vertex of Tg(ˆα, 0) to each joint point of J.
Then, the coordinate, normal, and distances of each vertex of Tg(ˆα, 0) are con-
catenated as the input feature for the network, and it computes the weights for
all vertices. Our network uses MLP to change the vertex feature dimension and
utilizes standard Residual Block [19] to extract features. Besides, we use graph
convolution to aggregate the neighborhood information. In order to make our
network applicable to diﬀerent garment categories, we use GAT [48] graph con-
volution, whose ﬁlter weight learning is independent of mesh connectivity, and
the weight is determined by the input feature on vertices only. This characteris-
tic makes our network based on GAT suitable for diﬀerent garment types. The
architecture details can be found in the supplementary.
3.4
Displacement Network
The shape structure of the garment can be well reconstructed based on the
PCA coeﬃcients α. However, high-frequency details, such as folds caused by
diﬀerent pose, are beyond the representation ability of the linear model. We
train a displacement network to regress the displacement of each garment vertex
on top of the base mesh. For the displacement, we use a similar network structure
with the skinning weight network. To improve the regression ability, we train an
independent network for each garment category rather than a general network
for all types. Moreover, we use spiral graph convolution [10] for each garment
category, which has state-of-the-art regression ability for meshes with the same
connectivity. To capture high frequency information, we project each vertex of
deformed base garment Mg(ˆα, ˆβ, ˆθ, 0) on the image, and crop the 32×32 patch
centered on the projected vertex. Then, for each vertex, we use a shared MLP to
encode its patch into a latent feature, and concatenate the feature with shared


BCNet
7
garment latent l, predicted SMPL shape parameter ˆβ, garment shape parameter
ˆα as well as its coordinate, normal and skinning transformation together as its
input feature for the displacement network. The details of the neural network
are given in the supplementary.
3.5
Loss Function
With our constructed dataset, ground truth shape and pose parameters are
available for all training data, thus it is natural to adopt supervised training.
In this part, we denote predicted Mg(ˆα, ˆβ, ˆθ, ˆD) and Mb(ˆβ, ˆθ)) as ˆMg and ˆMb
separately. In the following, we will give the details on how to design the loss
terms.
Losses on shape parameters. We directly adopt the MSE between pre-
dicted and ground truth shape parameters. The loss for SMPL body parameters
and garment parameters are separately deﬁned as:
LBp = ∥ˆβ −β∥2
2 + ∥
ˆ
R(θ) −R(θ)∥2
2 + ∥ˆt −t∥2
2,
LGp = ∥ˆα −α∥2
2.
(3)
Losses on geometry. We supervise reconstructed geometries and joints
with ground truth data. JB is the mapping to output posed 3D joints of SMPL
body Mb.
– Losses on reconstructed garment geometry and reconstructed body joints
are separately deﬁned as:
LG = ∥ˆMg −Mg∥2
2,
LJ3D = ∥JB( ˆMb) −JB(Mb)∥2
2.
(4)
– Losses on displacements D. To improve detail reconstruction ability, we use
ℓ1 loss for each vertex of D and ℓ2 loss on laplacian coordinates of D. L
represents the laplacian coordinates mapping from a 3D mesh.
LD1 = | ˆD −D|,
LD2 = ∥L( ˆD) −L(D)∥2
2.
(5)
Losses of projection. We use Π to represent the camera projection of 3D
geometries. All our training data share a common camera intrinsic matrix. The
loss of body projections and garment projections are separately deﬁned as:
LB2D = ∥Π( ˆMb) −Π(Mb)∥2
2,
LG2D = ∥Π( ˆMg) −Π(Mg)∥2
2.
(6)
Losses of classiﬁcation. We use standard softmax loss to penalize the
classiﬁcation error of ˆu and ˆd relative to ground truth garment types.
Losses of interpenetration. During training, inferred garments and body
are easy to occur interpenetration. We use a simple yet eﬀective interpenetration
term inspired by [18] to alleviate this problem:
Lint(P, Q) =
X
{i,j}∈C(P,Q)
ReLU(−nT
qj(pi −qj))/N,
(7)


8
B. Jiang et al.
where P,Q are two interpenetrated meshes. C(P, Q) represents the valid corre-
sponding pairs between P and Q, and these pairs are ﬁltered based on distances
and normal angles. This loss penalizes vertex pi that is inside the local plane
deﬁned by its corresponding point qj and its normal nqj. We use this loss on
reconstructed neutral garments and body as well as posed garments and body
separately:
Linters = Lint(Tg(ˆα, 0), Tb(ˆβ, 0)) + Lint( ˆMg, ˆMb)
(8)
Loss of Skinning Weight Network. As discussed in [30], the weight vec-
tor {ωij|j ∈|J(β)|} of Wg is a selection of diﬀerent bones with diﬀerent prob-
abilities. We use the Kullback-Leibler divergence loss to measure the distance
between predicted weights distribution ˆ
ωij and ground truth distribution ωij:
Lws =
|Vg|
X
i=1
24
X
j=1
ˆωij(log ˆωij
ωij
).
(9)
To train the whole network, we ﬁrst train the skinning weight network with
loss in Eq. (9), and then train other parts together by ﬁxing the skinning weight
network.
4
Dataset Construction
4.1
Skinning Weight Dataset
To train our skinning weight network, we need some neutral garments with
ground truth skinning weights. Our network training adapts to any weight cal-
culation method. For simpleness, we compute garment weights from the dressed
SMPL body.
For vertex pi of the garment, we select K vertices from dressed body mesh,
based on distance, normal angle, and segmentation prior. Segmentation prior is
some information we can utilize, such as corresponding vertices of right trouser
leg must belong to the right leg of body mesh. From selected K vertices of body,
we average their skinning weights with IDW(inverse distance weighting) as the
skinning weight of pi. After all vertices’ weights have been computed, we apply
Laplacian smoothing [45] to remove noises and artifacts.
With this method, for all garment types, we construct a skinning weights
dataset, which includes 48000 neutral garments for training, and 6467 for test.
4.2
Synthetic Dataset Construction
As there does not exist publicly available dataset containing pairs of the color
image and corresponding body and cloth shapes, we construct the dataset with
a physics-based simulation method. The dataset construction process can be
divided into four steps: sewing pattern design, neutral garment synthesis, posed


BCNet
9
Fig. 2. Our synthesis process of a pant. First, we generate a random sewing pattern
based on neutral body type. Then, we stitch the pattern on the skeleton and inﬂate the
skeleton to its original shape to generate the neutral pant. Finally, we skinning deform
the skeleton and neutral pant to a posture, and simulate the ﬁnal pant with gravity by
inﬂating the posed skeleton.
garment simulation and rendering. [49] proposed a novel method to synthesize
neutral garments. We extend their method to support more garment types and
posed garments generation.
As shown in Fig. 2, we ﬁrst design the pant sewing pattern based on body
type. Then, around the neutral skeleton, we connect the sewing lines of the front
and back pattern and shorten the length gradually. The sewing lines are stitched
together after all lengths of the sewing line are less than a threshold. To simulate
the realistic result of the garment draped on the neutral body, we inﬂate the
skeleton and add gravity. For posed garment simulation, we deform the neutral
garment to target pose with generated skinning weights and inﬂate the body and
add gravity to simulate the posed garment. In this work, we assume that both
the human body and the garment are in a statically stable state. Therefore, we
sample discrete pose instead of simulating the whole motion sequence.
After generating the garment shapes, the synthetic images are rendered by
following the methods in [29,28,47]. By randomly selecting body textures from
SURREAL [47], garment textures from Fabrics [22] and DTD [11], background
images from Places365-Standard dataset [58] and global illumination from hun-
dreds HDR images, we can render near-front view dressed body images with
abundant variations.
Fig. 3. Some examples from our synthetic dataset(left three) and HD texture
dataset(right three).


10
B. Jiang et al.
We implement the abovementioned pipeline using the simulator NvFlex[15]
and Blender[8]. We utilize 3048 body shape of SPRING dataset [53], and ran-
domly generate neutral clothes dressed on them. For posed garment, we select
55 motion sequences from CMU Mocap [34], whose poses have been converted
to SMPL pose parameters with MoSh [31]. For each motion sequence, we ran-
domly select 10 diﬀerent persons with 4 sets of diﬀerent clothing separately and
sample pose parameters every 30 frames. Finally, we get 168602 dressed bodies
as training data and 8874 as test data. The left part of Fig. 3 shows several
examples of our synthetic images.
Fig. 4. Two examples of rigged avatar registration. We show the scanned meshes with
and without texture, reconstructed geometries and garment with texture in each group.
4.3
HD Texture Dataset
Although synthetic samples are visually realistic, they still have a noticeable
domain diﬀerence with real images. Therefore, we process another dataset with
high-deﬁnition (HD) textures. We purchase 104 and 181 rigged avatar from Ren-
derPeople [42] and Axyz [6], respectively. These avatars have high-quality geom-
etry and realistic texture. We use Mixamo [33] to drive avatars and get about
89425 posed meshes as training data and 4386 as test data. The abovementioned
rendering pipeline is used to produce high-quality images, and the right part of
Fig. 3 shows some examples. Because the body and clothes part of the scanned
mesh are not separated, and the connectivities of scanned meshes are not con-
sistent, we need to process these meshes to our representation via the following
two steps.
Rigged registration. For a rigged mesh with A- or T-pose, we segment it
to garment and skin parts. We optimize garment shape parameters α, displace-
ments D, body parameters β, θ and translation t to register our representation
to the avatar. We penalize the point-to-plane distance for both reconstructed
garment and body. And we use Eq. (7) to reduce the interpenetration among
them. To get a size matching garment, we adopt the rendered silhouette loss uti-
lizing [25]. And we add ℓ2 regular term for garment and body parameters. With
