Title: Diffavatar: Simulation-ready garment optimization with differentiable simulation

DiffAvatar: Simulation-Ready Garment Optimization
with Differentiable Simulation
Yifei Li∗2
Hsiao-yu Chen1
Egor Larionov1
Nikolaos Sarafianos1
Wojciech Matusik2
Tuur Stuyck1
1Meta Reality Labs
2MIT CSAIL
3D Scan Images
DiffAvatar
𝜃!"# = 𝑓(𝜕𝐿
𝜕𝜃, 𝜃$%&)
𝜃𝒃𝒐𝒅𝒚
𝜃𝒅𝒓𝒆𝒔𝒔 𝒑𝒂𝒕𝒕𝒆𝒓𝒏
𝜃𝒎𝒂𝒕𝒆𝒓𝒊𝒂𝒍
Target Mesh Reconstruction
Clothed Avatar Retargeting
Asset Optimization with Differentiable Simulation
initial asset
optimized
Figure 1. We present DiffAvatar, an automated computational method to recover simulation-ready garment and body assets. Starting from
a multi-view capture, we reconstruct a semantically segmented 3D mesh. The segmented clothing geometry acts as a target shape for our
optimization pipeline. Our method recovers body shape and pose, clothing pattern and clothing material parameters from a single scan.
We optimize a clothing template in 2D pattern space to reproduce the captured clothing in 3D in a physical way. We compute gradients of
required parameters using a differentiable simulation approach.
Abstract
The realism of digital avatars is crucial in enabling
telepresence applications with self-expression and cus-
tomization. While physical simulations can produce real-
istic motions for clothed humans, they require high-quality
garment assets with associated physical parameters for
cloth simulations. However, manually creating these as-
sets and calibrating their parameters is labor-intensive
and requires specialized expertise.
Current methods fo-
cus on reconstructing geometry, but don’t generate com-
plete assets for physics-based applications.
To address
this gap, we propose DiffAvatar, a novel approach that
performs body and garment co-optimization using differ-
entiable simulation.
By integrating physical simulation
into the optimization loop and accounting for the com-
plex nonlinear behavior of cloth and its intricate interac-
tion with the body, our framework recovers body and gar-
ment geometry and extracts important material parameters
in a physically plausible way.
Our experiments demon-
strate that our approach generates realistic clothing and
body shape suitable for downstream applications. We pro-
vide additional insights and results on our webpage: peo-
ple.csail.mit.edu/liyifei/publication/diffavatar.
*This work was conducted during an internship at Meta Reality Labs
1. Introduction
Virtual avatars are increasingly gaining importance as
they serve as a digital extensions of users, enabling novel
social and professional interactions. The physical realism
of avatars, including realistic clothing and accurate body
shape, is crucial for such applications. This need for realism
extends beyond visual aesthetics but also includes dynamic
interactions and motion obtained by accurate physical sim-
ulation of clothing and body dynamics. Physical simulation
and rendering techniques can be used as tools to achieve
physical realism in the virtual world. However, this requires
the creation of high-quality clothing assets for individual
users, which presents a substantial challenge.
The con-
ventional approach requires meticulous manual design by
artists, a process that is exceedingly time-consuming. This
manual approach is fundamentally unfeasible for individu-
alized avatar clothing, especially considering the continu-
ously growing user base of telepresence applications. The
notion of having an artist create a unique virtual outfit for
every user is simply impractical. This scenario underscores
the pressing need for automated solutions for scalable and
personalized avatar asset creation and optimization. Recent
advancements in computer vision and graphics have accel-
erated the automation of avatar asset creation from user im-
ages or scans. However, the predominant focus has been on
geometry reconstruction, with limited focus on generating
arXiv:2311.12194v2  [cs.CV]  29 Mar 2024


complete assets that can be used in physics-based applica-
tions.
DiffAvatar endeavors to bridge this gap by introducing a
body and garment co-optimization pipeline using differen-
tiable simulation. By entwining physical simulation within
the optimization loop, we ensure that the dynamics of the
clothing are considered in the optimization process. We op-
timize for all assets required for physics-based simulation
and other downstream applications in a physically plausi-
ble way by leveraging differentiable cloth simulation for
body shape recovery and extending it to optimize for gar-
ment shape directly in the rest shape pattern space. Specifi-
cally, we recover garment patterns, body pose and shape, as
well as retrieving the crucial physical material parameters
leveraging only a minimal garment template library. We
believe that our work is the first to leverage high-resolution
differentiable simulation for asset recovery from real scans
which often contain holes and compromised boundaries. In
summary, our key contributions are as follows:
• A novel approach that utilizes differentiable simulation
for co-optimizing garment shape and materials, and body
shape and pose, while taking into account cloth deforma-
tions and collisions in the context of avatar asset recovery.
• A unified method for body shape, pose and garment assets
recovery from one real noisy 3D scan of a clothed person.
• For the first time in a differentiable cloth simulation al-
gorithm, we incorporate optimization through the cloth
rest shape. Additionally, we develop a differentiable con-
trol cage representation for garment shape optimization
to regularize the 2D garment pattern space and produce
effective optimization results.
2. Related Work
Pose and Shape Estimation precedes the garment shape
estimation and its properties since the underlying body di-
rectly impacts how cloth drapes and behaves when in mo-
tion. Prior works focus on reconstructing the body from
minimally clothed [2,36] captures or focus on complex cap-
tures of clothed humans [3, 10, 33, 34, 65] to extract a rep-
resentation for body and garments. These methods build
on SMPL [36], and work in conjunction with simulated
[3,33,34,65], or trained [10] garment models.
Cloth Simulation methods have been widely used for dig-
itally modeling the behavior of fabrics in visual effects and
movie productions since the pioneering work on implicit
cloth simulation [4] and follow-up works [12, 17, 20] al-
lowing for stable and efficient simulations. Position Based
Dynamics (PBD) [41] updates positions directly to project
constraints in a highly parallel fashion resulting in high per-
formance simulations. eXtended Position Based Dynamics
(XPBD) [38] overcome the limitation of iteration dependent
behavior of PBD while Projective Dynamics [7] connects
nodal Finite Element methods and Position Based methods,
leading to an efficient and accurate solver. Stuyck [52] pro-
vides an overview on cloth simulation techniques.
Garment Pattern Estimation is essential as the 2D sewing
pattern influences the fit and the formation of wrinkles on
the 3D body. One approach involves flattening the 3D shape
into several developable [51] 2D pieces. However, these
methods require manual cutting input to generate pieces
with minimal distortion [3, 42].
Other works use neural
networks to learn the seams [18], but the patterns obtained
through direct flattening of the 3D shape are only suitable
for nearly undeformed cloth, which is rarely the case in real-
world draped garments. Follow-up works employed neural
networks to learn the 2D rest shape and yield more accurate
patterns, but their generality is limited to the training data
and specific garments [11,65]. Parameterized garment pat-
terns [25, 26] address these limitations and can adapt to a
wide range of shapes but struggle to generalize to real gar-
ments and lack control over symmetry and matching seam
lines. Alternatively 2D patterns can be optimized using a
physics simulator in an iterative manner [5,56,62].
Differentiable Simulation allows for gradient computation
with respect to simulation parameters, enabling the use of
gradient-based optimization algorithms to find solutions for
inverse design and system identification. Early works ap-
plied the adjoint method to fluid [31, 40] and cloth [61]
simulation models to analytically compute gradients. Re-
cent techniques differentiate through complex simulations
such as Projective Dynamics [14] and XPBD [53]. Differ-
entiable simulation methods have successfully been applied
to cloth simulation with frictional contact [32], material es-
timation [9,27] and shape and pose estimation [21].
Learning-based approaches have focused on garment
draping, modeling of cloth dynamics, or handling collisions
and contact [6, 8, 19, 22, 24, 28, 30, 35, 45, 46, 48, 49, 54, 55,
63, 64] and hair [59, 60] and the introduction of new large-
scale datasets [67] albeit synthetic, will further accelerate
this progress.
DrapeNet [13] predicts a 3D deformation
field conditioned on the latent codes of a generative net-
work, which models garments as unsigned distance fields
allowing it to handle and edit unseen clothes. Qiu et al. [44]
reconstruct 3D clothes from monocular videos using SDFs
and deformation fields. Qi et al. [43] proposed a personal-
ized 2D pattern design method using synthetic data, where
the user can input specific constraints for personal 2D pat-
tern design from 3D point clouds. Li et al. [29] proposed a
parametric garment representation model for garment drap-
ing using SDFs.
3. Preliminaries
3.1. Body and Garment Models
Body Shape and Pose are represented using a parameter-
ized statistical body model similar to SMPL [36] in our


Preprocessing
Forward Computation
Backward Propagation
Body Shape & Pose Initialization
Sec 4.1
Gradient-Based 
Avatar Optimization
Sec 4.2
Optimized Avatar
3D Scan Preprocessing
Sec 4.2.5 Loss Function Design
Target Garment Segmentation
Sec 3.2 Cloth Simulation
Sec 3.3 Differentiable Simulation
Sec 3.1 Parametric Body Model
Sec 4.2.2 Body Pose & Shape Optimization
Sec 4.2.3 Control Cage Representation
Sec 4.2.3, 4.2.4 Garment  Material & Pattern Optimization
𝜃!
𝜃"
𝜃#
𝜃$
Cloth Pattern & 
Material
𝜃!
𝜃"
𝜃#
𝜃$
Body Parameters
𝜃!
𝜃"
𝜃#
𝜃$
Cloth Pattern & 
Material
𝜃!
𝜃"
𝜃#
𝜃$
Body Parameters
Figure 2. DiffAvatar generates simulation-ready avatar assets from inputs obtained through a multi-view capture. Our pipeline initially
preprocesses the 3D scan to segment the target garment and establish the initial pose and shape of the parametric body model. We employ a
differentiable simulation framework to align our simulated garment with the segmented garment by jointly optimizing the garment’s design
and material parameters, along with the body shape.
2D Pattern Space
3D Garment Space
Figure 3. 3D garments (right) can be compacted represented as
their 2D panels (left). Seams are visualized as dotted-lines.
method. The skeleton is defined by joints which are de-
scribed by P parameters encoding local transformations
through joint angles ψ and bone lengths. The shape is en-
coded by the statistical shape coefficients ν as V0 + νV
where V0 and V encode the average body shape and the
shape basis functions respectively. The body shape with Vb
vertices is posed with the skeleton using a linear blend skin-
ning function S : R3×Vb × RP →R3×Vb [39].
Garments can take on a wide range of 3D shapes when
draped onto a body, due to factors such as changing pose
and dynamics or wearer manipulations. Despite this large
variation in configurations, garments are compactly repre-
sented by their 2D patterns (Fig. 3), which consist of the
individual pieces of fabric that are sewn together to create
the 3D clothing. Therefore, we represent clothing in 2D
pattern space, which ensures developable [51] meshes and
manufacturable clothing. Virtual garments are modeled as
triangle meshes, with their rest shape encoded in these 2D
patterns. The rest shape is crucial for modeling the in-plane
stretching and shearing behavior of different fabrics.
3.2. Cloth Simulation
We compute the deformation of a garment mesh con-
sisting of V vertices which is draped on a posed body us-
ing dynamic physics-based simulation. The simulator ef-
fectively solves Newton’s equations of motion given by
M ˙v = −∇U(x), where x ∈R3V and v ∈R3V are the
vertex positions and velocities, U(x) is the energy poten-
tial and M is the mass matrix.
The simulator advances
the garment state qn = (xn, vn) at time step n forward
in time at discrete time steps ∆t. Q consists of states over
all time steps N. Although any simulation model can be
used, in this work, we make use of XPBD [38] due to its
excellent performance characteristics. The energy potential
U(x) is formulated in terms of a vector of all constraint
functions C(x) and an inverse compliance matrix α−1 as
U(x) = 1
2C(x)⊤α−1C(x). The constraints include trian-
gle constraints, dihedral bending and collision constraints,
modelling in-plane stretching and shearing, out-of-plane
bending and collisions respectively. At each time step, a
position update ∆x is computed using a Gauss-Seidel-like
iterative solver indexed by i of the following system:
 ∇C(xi)⊤M−1∇C(xi) + ˜α

∆λ = −C(xi) −˜αλi
∆x = M−1∇C(xi)∆λ,
(1)
where ˜α = α/∆t2 and λ is the constraint multiplier. Due
to the decoupled nature of the solve, the position update ∆x
can be computed separately for each constraint type. We
compute vertex positions as
xn+1 = xn + ∆x + ∆t
 vn + ∆tM−1fext

(2)
and velocities vn+1 =
1
∆t (xn+1 −xn) where fext denote
the external forces acting on the system.


3.3. Differentiable Cloth Simulation
Given a minimizing goal function ϕ computed through
complex dynamic simulations, differentiable simulation en-
ables gradient-based optimization methods by computing
its gradient ϕ with respect to the control parameters θ as
dϕ
dθ = ∂ϕ
∂Q
dQ
dθ + ∂ϕ
∂θ
(3)
However, due to the intractability of computing dQ/dθ di-
rectly, adjoint method is used to replace the vector-matrix
product with an equivalent, more efficient computation in-
volving the adjoint of Q, denoted by ˆQ which contains
all adjoint states ˆqn =
 ˆxn ∈R3V , ˆvn ∈R3V 
over all N
steps. We use prior work DiffXPBD [53] to compute gradi-
ents through the XPBD simulation model. Using the adjoint
states, the full derivative dϕ/dθ is obtained using
dϕ
dθ = ˆQ⊤∂∆x
∂θ + ∂ϕ
∂θ
(4)
where ∆x refers to the position updates computed in the
XPBD framework in Eq. 1. We refer the readers to [53] for
detailed derivations of the adjoint states ˆQ . The quantities
∂∆x/∂θ and ∂ϕ/∂θ are problem-specific, which we detail
in the next sections.
4. Methodology
We introduce our computational method for extracting
garment and body assets from real 3D scans of clothed hu-
mans. Our method uses a differentiable simulator for si-
multaneous co-optimization of garment 2D pattern shape,
cloth material, body pose and shape. See Fig. 2 for a visual
overview. Starting from an automatically selected template,
our goal is to optimize garment patterns and materials that
replicate the overall style and fit of the scan. Note that the
drape of a given garment, including the wrinkles and sur-
face details, can be different on different body shape and
state, and may be adjusted by the wearer, therefore we do
not aim to perfectly recreate the garment shapes exactly as
they appear in the scan. Additionally, we aim to recover the
overall body shape and pose but do not intend to recover
other appearance aspects such as the face, since it does not
influence the simulated behavior of the clothing.
4.1. Extracting 3D Garments and Parametric Body
We process multi-view images to reconstruct and seg-
ment a 3D scan and use the resulting geometry to initialize
the shape and pose of the parametric body model.
3D Scan Semantic Garment Segmentation From multi-
view images of a clothed person, we reconstruct a noisy 3D
scan using the 3dMD system [1]. These scans tend to be
noisy, contain holes and might not capture regions such as
hair or loose clothes accurately. We extract the 3D geome-
try of the isolated garment(s) of interest using a cloth seg-
mentation algorithm [16] on each of the 18 camera views to
obtain per-pixel class predictions. We enforce multi-view
class consistency by selecting the majority garment classes.
Body Shape and Pose Initialization To fit our parametric
body model to the scan, we optimize the body shape ν, pose
ψ and joint lengths by minimizing the Chamfer distance be-
tween the vertices and those of the full person scan. We use
a Gauss-Newton solver that takes joint limits into account
and penalizes self-penetrations of the body mesh.
4.2. Avatar Optimization
We leverage differentiable simulation (Sec. 3.3) to si-
multaneously recover garment pattern and material, as well
as body pose and shape. Starting from an initial pattern,
our method automatically adjusts the size and shape of each
panel in the pattern. To achieve this, we require a minimal
garment library that defines the pattern structure for each
type of garment. We use the semantic information (Sec. 4.1)
to automatically identify the garment types. With the esti-
mated body shape and pose, we drape the garment through
physical simulation to obtain the initial 3D garment state.
4.2.1
Optimization Problem Statement
Once initialized, we aim to find the parameters θ that mini-
mize a loss function ϕ (θ, Q). The loss function (Sec. 4.2.5)
encodes how close the geometry is to the segmented scan.
The control variables θ include statistical body shape ν
and pose ψ coefficients to model the body shape under the
clothing, material parameters λ to model the fabric proper-
ties and most importantly, the control cage handles ζ that
deform the 2D pattern space coordinates p of the garment
(Sec. 4.2.2).
We use gradient descent to optimize these variables over
multiple iterations.
In each iteration, we run a dynamic
differentiable simulation until the garments reach quasi-
equilibrium state with the current set of parameters θ to ob-
tain a draped garment. This draped garment is then used
to compute a loss, and the gradient information dϕ/dθ is
obtained through back-propagation using the differentiable
simulator. We determine the full gradient by computing the
jacobian ∂∆x/∂θ and ∂ϕ/∂θ to evaluate Eq. 4. In the fol-
lowing subsections, we explain how to compute gradients
with respect to θ. Note that our pipeline is not limited to the
specific implementation of DiffXPBD and can be applied to
any differentiable cloth simulation framework.
4.2.2
Garment Pattern Optimization
We propose a regularized differentiable cage formulation to
effectively and robustly optimize for the 2D patterns of gar-


ments such that the simulated and draped 3D representation
of the garment closely aligns with the scan.
Control Cage Pattern Representation: The 3D positions
of each garment is controled by its corresponding 2D pat-
tern (Fig. 3). While it is possible to directly optimize for the
2D pattern vertices p directly, this approach is highly non-
regularized and can produce ill-shaped or even non-physical
inverted rest shape geometries that cause simulators to fail.
Control Cage Handles ζ
2D Pattern Vertices p
A high number of optimization vari-
ables can also cause the optimization
to get stuck in a local minimum (See
our ablation study in Sec. 5.4). Ad-
ditionally, directly optimizing for the
2D coordinates does not respect de-
sign constraints that are better repre-
sented in a limited subspace of rea-
sonable designs. Therefore, we further regulate the opti-
mization problem by selecting and optimizing a set of 2D
control vertices ζ on the boundaries of the individual panels
of the 2D pattern that directly deform and manipulate the
underlying 2D patterns through control cages instead.
Control Cage Handle Selection: We use the geometric in-
formation of the 2D garment patterns to automatically iden-
tify control cage points, see the inset figure above. Our al-
gorithm first extracts the boundary loop of the underlying
mesh for each connected component representing a garment
panel in the 2D garment pattern, then processes the bound-
ary loop and marks a vertex as a control point if it lies on
the convex hull of the pattern or when its local curvature
exceeds a threshold (10° in our implementation).
Differentiable Control Cage Optimization: We use the
control handles to deform the underlying 2D pattern via
Mean Value Coordinates [23].
During initialization, we
computes a generalized barycentric coordinate for each ver-
tex in the 2D pattern with respect to each vertex on the con-
trol cage, expressed as ¯x = W ζ. We compute the required
derivatives to evaluate Eq. 4 following the chain rule as:
∂∆x
∂ζ
= ∂∆x
∂¯x
∂¯x
∂ζ = ∂∆x
∂¯x W
(5)
We detail the derivation for ∂∆x
∂¯x in the Supplementary
Material.
4.2.3
Body Shape and Pose Optimization
The initial body shape obtained from the geometry-based
optimization (Sec. 4.1) only uses the geometric information
from the scan. We improve accuracy for the body shape
and pose through differentiable simulation to explicitly ac-
count for the separate cloth geometry layer on top of the
body. The body interacts with the garments during simula-
tion solely through the collisions. Therefore we only need
to compute the derivatives for the collision response updates
∂∆xcloth-body collision to evaluate Eq. 4. Using chain rule, we
compute
∂∆xcloth-body collision
∂α
= ∂∆xcloth-body collision
∂xbody
∂xbody
∂α
(6)
where α is either body shape ν or pose ψ. The first term
∂∆xcloth-body collision/∂xbody measures how the cloth position
updates changes with a change in position update of the
body vertices. For the body shape parameters, the final term
is computed by back-propagating the gradients through the
body shape model described in Sec. 3.1. To obtain joint
angle gradients, we differentiate through the linear blend
skinning operation.
4.2.4
Material Property Estimation
We optimize for cloth material properties to better match
the shape of the scanned garments. See the supp. material
for details. The bending parameter has the most significant
effect [15] on the wrinkling of the cloth and can be inferred
from draped garments. Since the bending material parame-
ter λ only enters the computational graph when computing
the dihedral constraint, computing the jacobian reduces to
∂∆x/∂λ = ∂∆xDihedral/∂λ.
4.2.5
Loss Function Design
Our loss function is designed with two main components:
the feature matching term Lfeatures and the regularization
term Lregularization. The feature matching term encourages
the optimization to converge to the scan in the 3D world co-
ordinates after simulations, while the regularization terms
operate on the 2D patterns to maintain desired features. The
loss function is thus given by ϕ = Lfeatures + Lregularization.
Feature Matching
is used to ensure that the simulated
garment matches the scan. We use two distinct terms with
individual weights ρ and σ to achieve this goal. The bound-
ary loss term measures how well the boundaries overlap and
serves to drive correct lengths of the pattern to match size,
whereas the interior loss is designed to match the looseness
of the fit: Lfeatures = ρLboundary + σLinterior.
Boundary Feature Matching We segment boundary points
on the scan and align and match with those of the simulated
garment and minimize the L2 distance to boundaries such
as sleeve lengths and hems.
Interior Point Feature Matching We measure and mini-
mize the Chamfer distance between the interior points of
the simulated garment and target segmented garment scan.
Regularization
To improve our loss formulation, we in-
clude regularization terms that act on the pattern space to
maintain desired features in the design. We enable the opti-
mizer to adapt individual patterns in the garment design to


match features in the 3D scan. However, this process could
result in designs where seams that are to be sewn together
have different edge lengths, leading to undesired artifacts
such as gathering, which produces a ruffled effect. To pre-
vent this, we add two regularizers with weights α and β,
giving Lregularization = αLseam length+βLcurvature. We penalize
seam length differences for edges on the individual patterns
that are to be sewn together, as shown in Fig. 3. The color
coded seams that are to be sewn together should have the
same length. We color-coded a subset of the seams since
the right half is symmetric. Mathematically, we express this
as follows
Lseam length =
X
i∈Seam edges
||pi−pi+1||2−||p′
i−p′
i+1||2 (7)
Additionally, to prevent noisy and undesired designs,
we penalize the changes in boundary curvature of the 2D
pattern with respect to the original garment template sim-
ilar to the work of Wang [56].
We seek a scaled rota-
tion matrix Ti = sRi ∈R2×2 at each point pi with
least curvature distortion to its connected boundary edges,
Ti = arg minT ||ei1 −T¯ei1||2 + ||ei2 −T¯ei2||2 with
ei1 = pi+1 −pi and ei2 = pi−1 −pi. The loss is de-
fined as the accumulation of the curvature distortion as
Lcurvature =
X
i∈∂Ω
wi||(ei1 −Ti¯ei1)+(ei2 −Ti¯ei2)||2, (8)
where the quantities denoted by ¯· refer to the UV coordi-
nates in the original garment pattern.
5. Experiments
Data: We evaluate our method on a variety of 3D scans
of humans captured with a 3dMD [1] system. We select
4 subjects wearing different garments (dress, long-sleeve,
polo, shirt) and obtain their corresponding 3D reconstruc-
tions. Note that these scans tend to be noisy and contain
holes. Nevertheless, they can still serve as 3D targets during
the optimization process. Since there are no perfect or clean
“ground-truth” 3D scans available for evaluation, we have
asked a skilled professional artist to create virtual garments
that match the scans to the best of their ability. This pro-
cess serves as our upper quality bar. Therefore, we provide
quantitative comparisons using both the 3D scan input and
the artist-made garments as ground-truth to demonstrate the
clear improvements DiffAvatar offers over previous work.
Baselines: We evaluate the output geometry of our method
against two methods that employ 2D images as an input
and one that uses 3D scans. Specifically, we run PiFU-
HD [47] on the clothed human scan and segment the gar-
ment in 3D to use it for evaluations. We also employed a
recent diffusion-based approach that given a single garment
image, synthesizes six multi-view consistent novel views,
we then use NeuS [57] to extract the 3D geometry. We also
compare our method against PoP [37] which is the closest
to our work as it uses 3D scans as an input and outputs a
point cloud of the clothed human which we pass to Poisson
reconstruction to obtain a mesh. Finally, we provide a com-
parison of the 2D patterns against NeuralTailor [25] which
estimates 2D garment patterns from 3D point clouds of a
draped garment in Fig. 4.
Evaluation Metrics: Similar to [54] we use the Chamfer
Distance (CD) for comparisons directly in 3D, and LPIPS
[66] and SSIM [58] for perceptual metrics in the 2D space
using the exact same rendering conditions for all methods.
We evaluate the mesh quality of the results using the triangle
conditioning metric [50]. All metrics are reported in Tab. 1.
Implementation Details: Our method is implemented in
C++ using open-source libraries such as Eigen and libigl.
All experiments were conducted on a machine with 14-core
i7 CPU with 32GB RAM. Note that there is no limitation to
implement our method on GPU, and it would benefit from
our implementation since the expensive Jacobian compu-
tations map well to highly parallel GPU code. The linear
solve can be further accelerated with cuSPARSE.
Performance: DiffAvatar incorporates simulation within
an optimization process to yield high-quality outcomes at
the expense of increased computational requirements. Opti-
mization takes about one minute per iteration and total times
vary between 20 to 200 minutes depending on the garment
and iteration count. Baseline methods range between sev-
eral seconds to 10 minutes for complete inference results.
Note that our method can be executed in batch mode auto-
matically. Our method runs on CPU, whereas the baselines
are run on an NVIDIA GeForce RTX 4080 GPU.
5.1. Garment Pattern Optimization
The corresponding 2D optimized patterns for the dress
and long sleeve shirt are shown in Fig. 4. Starting from
the initial panel in the first column, DiffAvatar (last col-
umn) generates patterns closely resembling the one de-
signed manually by an artist (second last column). In con-
trast, although NeuralTailor [25] (second column) does not
need an initial template, the result can be far from the target
and can even be missing key features like the shirt sleeves.
5.2. Body and Cloth Material Optimization
We visualize different stages of our body shape estima-
tion in Fig. 5 (left) and demonstrate how our physics-aware
method improves the estimated body shape. The right of
the figure demonstrates our ability to recover cloth material
properties to closely match the garment drape in the scan.
5.3. Method Evaluations
We evaluate the reconstructed 3D geometry of our ap-
proach against three prior works (Fig. 6) and report quan-


Artist Made
Initial
Neural Tailor
DiffAvatar (Ours)
Figure 4. 2D pattern comparison. The automatically optimized
2D patterns of the dress (first row) and long sleeve shirt (second
row) by DiffAvatar closely match the manually created artist ones.
However, those generated by NeuralTailor [25] do not resemble
the artist-made patterns closely and miss important details.
Method
Against GT Scan
Against GT Artist
Mesh
CD ↓LPIPS ↓SSIM ↑CD ↓LPIPS ↓SSIM ↑
Quality ↑
min(avg)
Scan
-
-
-
1.045
0.127
0.852 0.099(0.422)
Artist
1.045
0.127
0.852
-
-
-
0.171(0.389)
Initial
3.071
0.165
0.815 3.396
0.123
0.859 0.188(0.391)
PiFU-HD [47]
1.930
0.145
0.836 2.009
0.129
0.836 0.000(0.305)
Diffusion+NeuS [57] 3.410
0.171
0.799 3.362
0.177
0.797 0.000(0.266)
PoP [37]
1.695
0.140
0.831 1.866
0.092
0.842 0.000(0.316)
DiffAvatar (Ours) 1.311
0.133
0.842 1.688
0.085
0.893 0.143(0.373)
Table 1. Quantitative Comparisons. We used the 3D scan and
artist-made mesh as ground truth to evaluate our method on the
dress example. Our results show that we achieve the closest CD
fit, best perceptual metrics, and produce good mesh quality. In
contrast, all competing methods produce a minimum mesh quality
of 0 (or near 0), making their output unsuitable for simulation.
titative results in Tab. 1. Regardless of the ground-truth
considered (scan or artist-made), DiffAvatar outperforms
all prior works across both 2D and 3D metrics.
PiFU-
HD [47] and Diffusion+NeuS reconstruct the frontal part
of the geometry fairly well but the back side is smooth and
all results lack fine-level details (wrinkles and folds). PoP
works better for tight-fit garments but fails to accurately re-
construct the details of a dress, producing closed-surface
meshes without arm holes that are unsuitable for simulation.
It is evident from these results that our approach is the only
one which faithfully captures the garment with simulation-
ready topology. To evaluate mesh quality, we apply a con-
ditioning quality metric [50] to the 3D meshes for a fair
comparison with the baseline methods that do not produce
rest shape geometry. Prior methods produce a near 0 mini-
mum mesh quality, which indicates the presence of poorly-
conditioned or zero-area triangles that are unsuitable for
simulation. Our results show favorable quality compared
to all past works.
Figure 5. Body shape and cloth material estimation. Left: We fit
a statistical body model to the 3D scan and refine this estimate us-
ing our differentiable simulation pipeline and show the difference
in shape between initial and refined in black. Right: Our initial
material estimate produces large folds that do not match the scan
as well as our optimized result shown rightmost.
Method Variant
CD ↓LPIPS ↓SSIM ↑
w/o Control Cage
3.866
0.168
0.792
w/o Seam Length Term
1.409
0.115
0.843
w/o Boundary Curvature Term 2.249
0.124
0.838
DiffAvatar (Complete)
1.122
0.102
0.863
Table 2. Ablation Study. By removing each of the proposed com-
ponents of DiffAvatar we showcase their impact in 3D with Cham-
fer Distance and 2D with perceptual metrics to the final result for
the dress against the ground-truth scan.
5.4. Ablation Studies
We perform an ablation study on the importance of indi-
vidual components in our design, see Fig. 7 and Tab. 2. We
demonstrate that our control cage formulation is crucial for
producing physically correct results that can be simulated.
The seam length regularization is necessary to prevent seam
length mismatches, which leads to excessive gathering of
the fabric.
The boundary curvature regularization is re-
quired to preserve the design intent of the garment.
5.5. Novel Simulated Sequences
In contrast to baseline methods, DiffAvatar is the only
one that generates high-quality simulation-ready geometry
with associated 2D rest shape and cloth material properties
enabling us to create new simulations that are faithful to the
original garment with ease. Fig. 1 shows select frames from
novel simulated sequences using the optimized dress. See
the supplemental material for additional animations.
5.6. Limitations and Future Work
Our method optimizes through a continuum of pattern
variations starting from a template based on the garment
category. Although we do not address discrete changes in


Figure 6. Qualitative Comparisons. DiffAvatar faithfully captures garments with natural draping behavior and wrinkle details where all
prior works fail to reconstruct simulation-ready meshes. Mesh quality (Top row). The generated mesh quality of the mesh visualized with
red-to-white gradient representing lowest to highest quality. DiffAvatar generates simulation-ready meshes of high quality, comparable to
artist-made meshes where 2D prior works such as PiFU-HD [47] and Diffusion+NeuS [57], or 3D works such as PoP [37] come short.
Figure 7. Ablation Study. Left: w/o control cage, the optimizer
quickly produces inverted non-physical triangle elements (high-
lighted in orange) in the rest shape which causes any simulator to
fail. Middle: w/o seam length regularization, the seam lines do not
match leading to excessive amount of fabric. Right: w/o boundary
curvature regularization, the pattern distorts into unwanted shapes.
the number of pattern pieces or mesh topology, such a sys-
tem can be incorporated into the pipeline retroactively. We
use dynamic simulation but rely on states close to quasi-
equilibrium. This implies that draped garments with strong
friction or dynamic effects can be challenging to estimate
and can produce a different final aesthetic. Since we are
already using a dynamic simulator, a straightforward exten-
sion is to match dynamic sequences and recover additional
parameters. For multi-layered clothing, garments can be
occluded, making recovery a fundamentally difficult goal.
Our method is well suited to handle occlusions due to its
strong physical priors about the behavior fabric.
6. Conclusion
We introduced DiffAvatar a new approach that utilizes
differentiable simulation for scene recovery to generate
high-quality, physically plausible assets that can be used
for simulation applications. Our method considers the com-
plex non-linear behavior of cloth and its intricate interaction
with the underlying body when optimizing for scene param-
eters in a unified and coupled manner that takes into account
the interplay of all components. We showcased that DiffA-
vatar outperforms prior works across different metrics, pro-
ducing high-quality garment results in both 3D and the 2D
pattern space and generates simulation-ready assets close to
those that are manually designed by a trained artist.
References
[1] 3dmd applications. from healthcare to artificial intelligence.
https://3dmd.com/. Accessed on November 2023. 4, 6
[2] Dragomir Anguelov, Praveen Srinivasan, Daphne Koller, Se-
bastian Thrun, Jim Rodgers, and James Davis. Scape: shape


completion and animation of people. In ACM SIGGRAPH
2005 Papers, pages 408–416. 2005. 2
[3] Seungbae Bang, Maria Korosteleva, and Sung-Hee Lee. Es-
timating garment patterns from static scan data. Computer
Graphics Forum, 40(6):273–287, 2021. 2
[4] David Baraff and Andrew Witkin. Large steps in cloth sim-
ulation. In Proceedings of the 25th annual conference on
Computer graphics and interactive techniques, pages 43–54,
1998. 2
[5] Aric Bartle, Alla Sheffer, Vladimir G. Kim, Danny M. Kauf-
man, Nicholas Vining, and Floraine Berthouzoz. Physics-
driven pattern adjustment for direct 3d garment editing. ACM
Trans. Graph., 35(4), jul 2016. 2
[6] Hugo Bertiche, Meysam Madadi, and Sergio Escalera. Neu-
ral cloth simulation. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG),
41(6):1–14, 2022. 2
[7] Sofien Bouaziz, Sebastian Martin, Tiantian Liu, Ladislav Ka-
van, and Mark Pauly. Projective dynamics: Fusing constraint
projections for fast simulation. ACM transactions on graph-
ics (TOG), 33(4):1–11, 2014. 2
[8] Andr´es Casado-Elvira, Marc Comino Trinidad, and Dan
Casas. Pergamo: Personalized 3d garments from monocu-
lar video. In Computer Graphics Forum, volume 41, pages
293–304. Wiley Online Library, 2022. 2
[9] Hsiao-yu Chen, Edith Tretschk, Tuur Stuyck, Petr Kadlecek,
Ladislav Kavan, Etienne Vouga, and Christoph Lassner. Vir-
tual elastic objects. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Con-
ference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages
15827–15837, 2022. 2
[10] Xin Chen, Anqi Pang, Wei Yang, Peihao Wang, Lan Xu, and
Jingyi Yu. Tightcap: 3d human shape capture with cloth-
ing tightness field. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG),
41(1):1–17, 2021. 2
[11] Xipeng Chen, Guangrun Wang, Dizhong Zhu, Xiaodan
Liang, Philip H. S. Torr, and Liang Lin. Structure-preserving
3d garment modeling with neural sewing machines.
In
NeurIPS, 2022. 2
[12] Kwang-Jin Choi and Hyeong-Seok Ko. Stable but responsive
cloth. In ACM SIGGRAPH 2005 Courses, 2005. 2
[13] Luca De Luigi, Ren Li, Benoit Guillard, Mathieu Salzmann,
and Pascal Fua. DrapeNet: Garment Generation and Self-
Supervised Draping. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Con-
ference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2023.
2
[14] Tao Du, Kui Wu, Pingchuan Ma, Sebastien Wah, Andrew
Spielberg, Daniela Rus, and Wojciech Matusik.
Diffpd:
Differentiable projective dynamics. ACM Transactions on
Graphics (TOG), 41(2):1–21, 2021. 2
[15] Xudong Feng, Wenchao Huang, Weiwei Xu, and Huamin
Wang. Learning-based bending stiffness parameter estima-
tion by a drape tester. ACM Trans. Graph., 41(6), nov 2022.
5
[16] Cheng-Yang Fu, Tamara L Berg, and Alexander C Berg.
Imp: Instance mask projection for high accuracy semantic
segmentation of things. In ICCV, 2019. 4
[17] Yotam Gingold, Adrian Secord, Jefferson Y Han, Eitan Grin-
spun, and Denis Zorin. A discrete model for inelastic de-
formation of thin shells. In ACM SIGGRAPH/Eurographics
symposium on computer animation. Citeseer, 2004. 2
[18] Chihiro Goto and Nobuyuki Umetani. Data-driven garment
pattern estimation from 3d geometries.
In Eurographics,
2021. 2
[19] Artur Grigorev, Michael J Black, and Otmar Hilliges. Hood:
Hierarchical graphs for generalized modelling of clothing
dynamics. In CVPR, 2023. 2
[20] Eitan Grinspun, Anil N Hirani, Mathieu Desbrun, and Peter
Schr¨oder. Discrete shells. In Proceedings of the 2003 ACM
SIGGRAPH/Eurographics symposium on Computer anima-
tion, pages 62–67. Citeseer, 2003. 2
[21] Jingfan Guo, Jie Li, Rahul Narain, and Hyun Soo Park.
Inverse simulation: Reconstructing dynamic geometry of
clothed humans via optimal control.
In Proceedings of
the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, pages 14698–14707, 2021. 2
[22] Oshri Halimi, Tuur Stuyck, Donglai Xiang, Timur Bagautdi-
nov, He Wen, Ron Kimmel, Takaaki Shiratori, Chenglei Wu,
Yaser Sheikh, and Fabian Prada.
Pattern-based cloth reg-
istration and sparse-view animation. ACM Transactions on
Graphics (TOG), 41(6):1–17, 2022. 2
[23] Tao Ju, Scott Schaefer, and Joe Warren. Mean value coor-
dinates for closed triangular meshes. ACM Transactions on
Graphics, 24(3):561–566, 2005. 5
[24] Navami Kairanda, Marc Habermann, Christian Theobalt,
and Vladislav Golyanik. Neuralclothsim: Neural deforma-
tion fields meet the kirchhoff-love thin shell theory. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2308.12970, 2023. 2
[25] Maria Korosteleva and Sung-Hee Lee. Neuraltailor: Recon-
structing sewing pattern structures from 3d point clouds of
garments. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG), 41(4):1–
16, 2022. 2, 6, 7
[26] Maria Korosteleva and Olga Sorkine-Hornung.
Garment-
Code:
Programming parametric sewing patterns.
ACM
Transaction on Graphics, 42(6), 2023. SIGGRAPH ASIA.
2
[27] Egor Larionov, Marie-Lena Eckert, Katja Wolff, and Tuur
Stuyck.
Estimating cloth elasticity parameters using
position-based simulation of compliant constrained dynam-
ics. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.08790, 2022. 2
[28] Dohae Lee and In-Kwon Lee.
Multi-layered unseen gar-
ments draping network. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.03492,
2023. 2
[29] Ren Li, Benoˆıt Guillard, and Pascal Fua. Isp: Multi-layered
garment draping with implicit sewing patterns. In NeurIPS,
2023. 2
[30] Ren Li, Benoˆıt Guillard, Edoardo Remelli, and Pascal Fua.
Dig: Draping implicit garment over the human body.
In
ACCV, 2022. 2
[31] Yifei Li, Tao Du, Sangeetha Grama Srinivasan, Kui Wu, Bo
Zhu, Eftychios Sifakis, and Wojciech Matusik. Fluidic topol-
ogy optimization with an anisotropic mixture model. ACM
Trans. Graph., nov 2022. 2
[32] Yifei Li, Tao Du, Kui Wu, Jie Xu, and Wojciech Matusik.
Diffcloth: Differentiable cloth simulation with dry frictional
contact. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG), 42(1):1–20,
2022. 2


[33] Yue Li, Marc Habermann, Bernhard Thomaszewski, Stelian
Coros, Thabo Beeler, and Christian Theobalt. Deep physics-
aware inference of cloth deformation for monocular human
performance capture. In 2021 International Conference on
3D Vision (3DV), pages 373–384, Los Alamitos, CA, USA,
dec 2021. IEEE Computer Society. 2
[34] Junbang Liang and Ming Lin.
Fabric material recovery
from video using multi-scale geometric auto-encoder.
In
European Conference on Computer Vision, pages 695–714.
Springer, 2022. 2
[35] Lijuan Liu, Xiangyu Xu, Zhijie Lin, Jiabin Liang, and
Shuicheng Yan. Towards garment sewing pattern reconstruc-
tion from a single image. ACM Transactions on Graphics
(SIGGRAPH Asia), 2023. 2
[36] Matthew Loper, Naureen Mahmood, Javier Romero, Ger-
ard Pons-Moll, and Michael J. Black.
SMPL: A skinned
multi-person linear model.
ACM Trans. Graphics (Proc.
SIGGRAPH Asia), 34(6):248:1–248:16, Oct. 2015. 2
[37] Qianli Ma, Jinlong Yang, Siyu Tang, and Michael J Black.
The power of points for modeling humans in clothing. In
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on
Computer Vision, pages 10974–10984, 2021. 6, 7, 8
[38] Miles Macklin, Matthias M¨uller, and Nuttapong Chentanez.
Xpbd: position-based simulation of compliant constrained
dynamics. In Proceedings of the 9th International Confer-
ence on Motion in Games, pages 49–54, 2016. 2, 3
[39] Thalmann Magnenat, Richard Laperri`ere, and Daniel Thal-
mann. Joint-dependent local deformations for hand anima-
tion and object grasping.
Technical report, Canadian Inf.
Process. Soc, 1988. 3
[40] Antoine McNamara, Adrien Treuille, Zoran Popovi´c, and Jos
Stam. Fluid control using the adjoint method. ACM Trans-
actions On Graphics (TOG), 23(3):449–456, 2004. 2
[41] Matthias M¨uller, Bruno Heidelberger, Marcus Hennix, and
John Ratcliff. Position based dynamics. Journal of Visual
Communication and Image Representation, 18(2):109–118,
2007. 2
[42] Nico Pietroni, Corentin Dumery, Raphael Falque, Mark Liu,
Teresa Vidal-Calleja, and Olga Sorkine-Hornung. Computa-
tional pattern making from 3d garment models. ACM Trans.
Graph., 41(4), jul 2022. 2
[43] Anran Qi, Sauradip Nag, Xiatian Zhu, and Ariel Shamir. Per-
sonaltailor: Personalizing 2d pattern design from 3d garment
point clouds. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.09695, 2023. 2
[44] Lingteng Qiu, Guanying Chen, Jiapeng Zhou, Mutian Xu,
Junle Wang, and Xiaoguang Han. Rec-mv: Reconstructing
3d dynamic cloth from monocular videos. In Proceedings of
the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, pages 4637–4646, 2023. 2
[45] Carlos Rodriguez-Pardo, Melania Prieto-Martin, Dan Casas,
and Elena Garces. How will it drape like? capturing fab-
ric mechanics from depth images. In Computer Graphics
Forum, volume 42, pages 149–160. Wiley Online Library,
2023. 2
[46] Cristian Romero, Dan Casas, Maurizio M Chiaramonte, and
Miguel A Otaduy.
Contact-centric deformation learning.
ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG), 41(4):1–11, 2022.
2
[47] Shunsuke Saito, Tomas Simon, Jason Saragih, and Hanbyul
Joo. Pifuhd: Multi-level pixel-aligned implicit function for
high-resolution 3d human digitization.
In Proceedings of
the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, pages 84–93, 2020. 6, 7, 8
[48] Igor Santesteban, Miguel A Otaduy, and Dan Casas. Snug:
Self-supervised neural dynamic garments. In CVPR, 2022. 2
[49] Igor Santesteban, Nils Thuerey, Miguel A Otaduy, and Dan
Casas. Self-supervised collision handling via generative 3d
garment models for virtual try-on. In CVPR, 2021. 2
[50] Jonathan Richard Shewchuk. What is a good linear element?
interpolation, conditioning, and quality measures. In Inter-
national Meshing Roundtable Conference, 2002. 6, 7
[51] Oded Stein, Eitan Grinspun, and Keenan Crane. Developa-
bility of triangle meshes. ACM Transactions on Graphics
(TOG), 37(4):1–14, 2018. 2, 3
[52] Tuur Stuyck.
Cloth simulation for computer graphics.
Springer Nature, 2022. 2
[53] Tuur Stuyck and Hsiao-yu Chen. Diffxpbd: Differentiable
position-based simulation of compliant constraint dynamics.
Proceedings of the ACM on Computer Graphics and Inter-
active Techniques, 6(3):1–14, 2023. 2, 4, 12
[54] Zhaoqi Su, Liangxiao Hu, Siyou Lin, Hongwen Zhang,
Shengping Zhang, Justus Thies, and Yebin Liu. Caphy: Cap-
turing physical properties for animatable human avatars. In
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on
Computer Vision, pages 14150–14160, 2023. 2, 6
[55] Garvita Tiwari, Nikolaos Sarafianos, Tony Tung, and Ger-
ard Pons-Moll. Neural-gif: Neural generalized implicit func-
tions for animating people in clothing. In ICCV, 2021. 2
[56] Huamin Wang.
Rule-free sewing pattern adjustment with
precision and efficiency.
ACM Transactions on Graphics
(TOG), 37(4):1–13, 2018. 2, 6
[57] Peng Wang, Lingjie Liu, Yuan Liu, Christian Theobalt, Taku
Komura, and Wenping Wang. Neus: Learning neural implicit
surfaces by volume rendering for multi-view reconstruction.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.10689, 2021. 6, 7, 8
[58] Zhou Wang, Alan C Bovik, Hamid R Sheikh, and Eero P Si-
moncelli. Image quality assessment: from error visibility to
structural similarity. IEEE transactions on image processing,
13(4):600–612, 2004. 6
[59] Ziyan Wang, Giljoo Nam, Tuur Stuyck, Stephen Lombardi,
Chen Cao, Jason Saragih, Michael Zollh¨ofer, Jessica Hod-
gins, and Christoph Lassner. Neuwigs: A neural dynamic
model for volumetric hair capture and animation. In Pro-
ceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pages 8641–8651, June
2023. 2
[60] Ziyan Wang, Giljoo Nam, Tuur Stuyck, Stephen Lombardi,
Michael Zollh¨ofer, Jessica Hodgins, and Christoph Lassner.
Hvh: Learning a hybrid neural volumetric representation
for dynamic hair performance capture.
In Proceedings of
the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, pages 6143–6154, 2022. 2
[61] Chris Wojtan, Peter J Mucha, and Greg Turk. Keyframe con-
trol of complex particle systems using the adjoint method.
In Proceedings of the 2006 ACM SIGGRAPH/Eurographics
symposium on Computer animation, pages 15–23, 2006. 2
