Title: SimAvatar: Simulation-Ready Avatars with Layered Hair and Clothing

SimAvatar: Simulation-Ready Avatars with Layered Hair and Clothing
Xueting Li, Ye Yuan, Shalini De Mello, Gilles Daviet, Jonathan Leaf, Miles Macklin,
Jan Kautz, Umar Iqbal
NVIDIA
https://nvlabs.github.io/SimAvatar
Adele with long layered waved hairstyle wearing a sleeveless dress of tea-length, the garment has a delicate butterfly print, 
with small, colorful butterflies.
(a) simulation-ready avatar with layered hair, garment 
and body
(b) simulated avatar in different poses
(c) example simulation-ready avatars.
Figure 1. (a) SimAvatar synthesizes simulation-ready 3D avatars with layered hair, body and clothing. (b) By leveraging physics-based
simulators, SimAvatar produces realistic pose-dependent motion effects such as flowing hair strands and garment wrinkles. (c) SimAvatar
produces simulation-ready 3D avatars with diverse identities, garments, and hairstyles.
Abstract
We introduce SimAvatar, a framework designed to gener-
ate simulation-ready clothed 3D human avatars from a text
prompt. Current text-driven human avatar generation meth-
ods either model hair, clothing, and the human body using
a unified geometry or produce hair and garments that are
not easily adaptable for simulation within existing simu-
lation pipelines. The primary challenge lies in represent-
ing the hair and garment geometry in a way that allows
leveraging established prior knowledge from foundational
image diffusion models (e.g., Stable Diffusion) while being
simulation-ready using either physics or neural simulators.
To address this task, we propose a two-stage framework that
combines the flexibility of 3D Gaussians with simulation-
ready hair strands and garment meshes. Specifically, we
first employ three text-conditioned 3D generative models to
generate garment mesh, body shape and hair strands from
the given text prompt. To leverage prior knowledge from
foundational diffusion models, we attach 3D Gaussians to
the body mesh, garment mesh, as well as hair strands and
learn the avatar appearance through optimization. To drive
the avatar given a pose sequence, we first apply physics sim-
ulators onto the garment meshes and hair strands. We then
transfer the motion onto 3D Gaussians through carefully
designed mechanisms for each body part. As a result, our
arXiv:2412.09545v2  [cs.CV]  19 Dec 2024


synthesized avatars have vivid texture and realistic dynamic
motion. To the best of our knowledge, our method is the
first to produce highly realistic, fully simulation-ready 3D
avatars, surpassing the capabilities of current approaches.
1. Introduction
The creation of photo-realistic and dynamic human avatars
has a wide range of applications, including virtual try-on,
film and gaming production, virtual assistants, AR/VR, and
telepresence. Traditionally, this process has required spe-
cialized training, making it inaccessible to general users.
Recently, advancements in foundational diffusion models
have accelerated research efforts aimed at democratizing 3D
human avatar creation, enabling easy user control through
text [16, 46, 52, 90] or images [39].
Earlier approaches for 3D human avatar creation repre-
sent the hair, body, and clothing as a single layer, making it
difficult to independently simulate or edit each region due
to their entangled geometry. To address this limitation, re-
cent works have used layered structures to separately rep-
resent the body, garments, or hair [27, 36, 84, 97]. How-
ever, many of these approaches rely on implicit representa-
tions, such as NeRF [59], to define garment or hair geom-
etry. Although implicit representations facilitate leveraging
prior knowledge from foundational diffusion models, they
are challenging to animate within existing simulators, lim-
iting the realistic motion of hair and garments due to body
movements. As a result, these methods struggle to produce
avatars that look realistic when animated.
Thus, a natural question arises: can we design a 3D
avatar generation pipeline that can leverage rich prior
knowledge from image diffusion models, while being read-
ily compatible with existing simulation pipelines? The key
challenge in addressing this question lies in connecting the
different representations used in current simulators and text-
driven avatar generation pipelines. The former typically re-
quires a smooth and clean non-watertight mesh or specif-
ically designed hair strands, whose topologies are inflexi-
ble for optimization and hard to constrain. The latter of-
ten adopt implicit representations (such as NeRF [59] or
SDF [85]) which, while optimizable by noisy supervision
signals from diffusion models, cannot be easily converted
to an open mesh or hair strands suitable for simulation.
To address these issues, we present a novel framework,
SimAvatar, which generates a 3D human avatar from a text
prompt that can be readily animated by existing hair and
garment simulators. The key idea is to adopt suitable rep-
resentations for different human parts (e.g., hair, body, and
garments) and leverage the prior knowledge of both image
diffusion models and simulators. To this end, we propose
representing the geometry of human hair, body, and gar-
ment using hair strands, parametric body model SMPL [56],
and meshes, respectively. While these representations are
simulation-ready, they pose challenges to learning realistic
texture details. To resolve this issue, we further attach 3D
Gaussians to these coarse geometric representations. 3D
Gaussians are not only flexible and can be easily driven by
the mesh or hair strands, but they also show impressive ca-
pacity to model realistic appearance when combined with
image diffusion models [55, 90].
Given a text prompt, we first generate hair strands,
body mesh, and garment mesh using three separate text-
conditioned 3D generative models trained specifically for
each body region. We then attach and learn 3D Gaussians
through Score Distillation Sampling (SDS) based optimiza-
tion using a powerful diffusion model trained on human im-
ages [1]. To drive the avatar using a given pose sequence,
we animate the body using linear blend skinning while the
hair strands and garment mesh are simulated using their re-
spective simulators [23, 30]. Next, we transfer the motion
from the strands or meshes onto 3D Gaussians through a
carefully designed mechanism to ensure they conform to the
mesh or strand motion. During inference, the avatar can be
easily animated by novel pose sequences. Our novel design
yields avatars with both realistic appearance and dynamic
motion with pose-dependent deformations of the hairs and
garment as shown in Fig. 1. Our contributions are summa-
rized as follows:
• To the best of our knowledge, this is the first work that
generates fully simulation-ready 3D avatars with sepa-
rate layers for the body, garment, and hair.
• We propose a text-conditioned diffusion model to gen-
erate plausible garment geometry given text inputs and
show how existing text-conditioned hair strands and
body shape generators can be efficiently leveraged.
• We use 3D Gaussians on top of the body mesh, hair
strands, and garment mesh to synthesize high-fidelity
appearance details. We optimize the properties of Gaus-
sians using carefully designed SDS-based optimiza-
tion [89] and ensure plausible texture disentanglement
using additional regularization and prompt engineering.
• Our approach produces avatars with detailed geometry,
realistic texture, as well as dynamic garment and hair
motion, resulting in significantly better quality than ex-
isting methods.
2. Related Work
2.1. Text to 3D Avatar Generation
The domain of text-to-3D generation has witnessed signif-
icant advancements [18, 53, 64, 67, 80, 87] driven by the
advent of large text-to-image models [21, 68, 69, 99]. Fol-
lowing the success in generating static 3D objects, vari-
ous methods have also been developed to create animatable
human avatars [16, 37–40, 42, 46, 52, 98, 101]. ClipMa-
trix [40] was among the first to create animatable avatars


based on textual descriptions, using a CLIP-embedding loss
to optimize a mesh-based representation. AvatarClip [34]
followed a similar approach but with a NeRF-based rep-
resentation [85]. DreamAvatar [16] and AvatarCraft [42]
used SDS loss instead of CLIP and learned the NeRF rep-
resentation in canonical space by integrating human body
priors from SMPL [56].
DreamHumans [46] introduced
a pose-conditioned NeRF representation to also model
pose-dependent deformations. DreamWaltz [38], Avatar-
Verse [98] and HumanNorm [99] leverage ControlNets [99]
and demonstrate improved avatar quality with conditional
SDS. AvatarBooth [94] fine-tunes region-specific diffusion
models, highlighting that using dedicated models for dis-
tinct body regions improves avatar quality.
Other meth-
ods explore different representations to model the avatars.
TADA [52] demonstrates that a mesh-based approach with
adaptive mesh subdivision can create high-quality avatars.
More recently, GAvatar [90] adopted a primitive-based 3D
Gaussian representation, allowing faster rendering in higher
resolution and showing higher quality. All of the afore-
mentioned methods, however, represent the human body,
hairs, and garment geometry using a single layer and an-
imate the avatar using linear blend skinning. Hence, they
cannot model physically plausible and pose-dependent geo-
metric deformations of the avatar’s clothing and hair result-
ing in avatars that do not appear realistic when animated.
There are only a few works that generate avatars with
separate body and garment or hair layers. SO-SMPL [84]
uses SMPL+D [63] to separately represent the cloth layers,
but cannot capture loose clothing due to the inherent lim-
itations of SMPL+D representation. HumanLiff [36], Hu-
manCoser [86], and TELA [27] use NeRF-based represen-
tations and progressively generate minimal-clothed human
body and layer-wise clothes. GALA [45] takes an existing
single-layer avatar and disentangles it into separate layers
using DMTet representation [29] and SDS [64] optimiza-
tion. TECA [97] aims to model hairs in a separate layer but
adopts a NeRF-based representation. However, the meshes
extracted from NeRF or DMTet tend to be very noisy and
cannot be simulated easily using cloth or hair simulators.
Our approach, on the other hand, generates avatars with
simulation-ready garments and hair.
It can model loose
clothing, realistic hair with varied lengths and hairstyles,
realistic texture, and dynamic motion.
2.2. Garment Modeling and Simulation
One of the most common methods for modeling garments
is SMPL+D [3–5, 14, 15, 58, 63, 96], which adds vertex
displacements to the SMPL body mesh to capture the ge-
ometry of clothed human bodies. However, this approach
struggles to represent loose clothing and dresses due to
its fixed topology. To address this limitation, many meth-
ods propose modeling clothing separately. DiffAvatar [50]
presents a method for reconstructing untextured garment
meshes from scan images using a differentiable simulator.
Garment3DGen [75] reconstructs textured garment meshes
from a single input image by optimizing and deforming a
base garment template to align with the target pose. BC-
Net [41] directly predicts garment type and shape parame-
ters using a learned regressor, while DeepCloth [79] repre-
sents garments through a canonical UV-representation, en-
coding them in a shared latent space. More recent methods
utilize implicit unsigned distance fields for their flexibil-
ity in modeling arbitrary topologies and handling open sur-
faces, which are crucial for cloth simulators [17, 20, 25, 32,
66]. However, these methods typically focus solely on mod-
eling clothing geometry, neglecting the underlying human
body, hair, and texture details. In this work, we build on
these methods and propose a novel text-conditioned diffu-
sion model to generate garment meshes using text prompts,
while also generating avatars with complete texture and ap-
pearance details for garment, hair, and body layers.
For body motion-driven garment simulation, traditional
methods use physics simulators to drape garments on
the human body while modeling their material proper-
ties [13, 19, 82, 83], and avoiding collisions with the un-
derlying body [7, 81].
Differentiable physics simulators
have also been proposed to integrate physics into learn-
ing and optimization-based frameworks [49, 51].
While
these methods produce highly realistic garment animations,
physics simulation is generally computationally expensive
and can become unstable in cases of severe interpenetra-
tion between the garment and body layers. To overcome
these limitations, more recent works propose neural simu-
lators, which are neural networks trained to generate gar-
ment deformations based on body pose and shape infor-
mation [30, 31, 58, 61, 70, 72, 73]. Earlier methods were
trained in a garment-specific manner and could not general-
ize across different garment types [60, 71]. However, more
recent methods can handle various garment topologies, in-
cluding loose clothing and dresses [10–12, 30, 73, 74, 92].
While our method can utilize both physics-based and neural
simulators, here we use HOOD [30] as the neural simulator.
2.3. Hair Modeling and Simulation
For hair modeling, strand-based representations are widely
favored due to their compatibility with physics simulators
and ease of geometric manipulation [23, 28, 35, 62, 76, 91].
The main challenge in image- or text-guided generation of
hair strands lies in capturing the hair’s complex appearance,
especially the inner strands that are often occluded. For ge-
ometry, recent approaches use data-driven priors based on
diffusion models to estimate plausible inner strands despite
their occlusion in observed data [77, 78]. For appearance,
existing methods employ a strand-aligned 3D Gaussian rep-
resentation to effectively model intricate hair textures and


varied strand thickness [57, 93]. In this work, we build upon
these methods for full-body avatar generation. Specifically,
we use a diffusion-based text-to-hair generation model [78]
to create hair strands from text prompts. We then attach
3D Gaussians [93] to the generated strands to model hair
appearance and refine hairstyle according to the given text
prompt. Finally, we incorporate a hair simulator [23] during
avatar creation to simulate hairs for varied poses which al-
lows for optimizing the appearance of the inner strands and
ensures proper disentanglement of face and hair textures.
3. Method
Given a text prompt T , we introduce a novel framework,
SimAvatar, for synthesizing simulation-ready 3D avatars
with layered representations of the body, hair, and gar-
ment. Unlike traditional text-to-avatar methods that use a
single geometry for the entire avatar [18, 52, 90], our ap-
proach decomposes the avatar geometry into distinct lay-
ers, each leverages a representation tailored to its simula-
tion and geometry modeling.
This layered structure not
only enhances realism but also enables robust simulation
of each component, dramatically improving flexibility in
animation and customization. Specifically, our avatar ge-
ometry is represented by three distinct layers: (1) Body
mesh, defined by the SMPL parametric model [56], pro-
viding a robust foundation for realistic body shapes and
movements; (2) Garment mesh, generated using a text-
conditioned diffusion model, which produces smooth cloth-
ing meshes that are ready for simulation (see Sec. 3.2); (3)
Hair strands, modeled using a text-conditioned diffusion
model, allowing for the generation of complex hairstyles
with strand-level detail (see Sec. 3.1). This approach allows
our method to readily handle dynamic scenarios. Given a
target body pose sequence P = {p1, ..., pn}, the body mesh
is deformed through linear blend skinning [56] while both
the garment mesh and hair strands are simulated using ad-
vanced physics-based simulators (Sec. 3.1), ensuring realis-
tic motion under various conditions.
To further enable our layered representation to model de-
tailed avatar appearance, including body, hair, and garment,
we propose a 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS)-based appear-
ance model that builds on top of the layered representation.
In particular, we attach 3D Gaussians to the layered geome-
try of body, garment, and hair, while customizing the Gaus-
sians for each body part to capture the unique structural and
dynamic properties of the part. These 3D Gaussians are op-
timized using Score Distillation Sampling (SDS) [64, 90],
allowing us to refine appearance details in a way that lever-
ages powerful diffusion priors (Sec. 3.3). As a result, the
generated avatars not only look more realistic but also main-
tain high fidelity during animation. An overview of our
framework is shown in Fig. 2.
3.1. Preliminaries
Garment simulation.
In this work, we utilize a neural
simulator (i.e., HOOD [30]) to produce a simulated gar-
ment mesh sequence. Given a garment mesh g0 and the
target body pose sequence P, HOOD first computes the
SMPL body mesh corresponding to the SMPL parameters.
By treating the body meshes as obstacles, HOOD utilizes
a GNN to predict the physical status (e.g., position, veloc-
ity, etc.) of each vertex on the garment mesh and produce
a simulated garment sequence denoted as G = {g1, ..., gn}.
More details are discussed in [30].
Strand-based hair representation.
In this work, we
choose strand-based hair representation to capture the thin
and layer-wise structure of hairs. We represent hair as a
point cloud h0 ∈RNs×Nl×3 that is composed of Ns hair
strands, with each strand includes Nl line segments.
Hair simulation.
Given hair strands h0, a target body
mesh sequence P and the simulated garment sequence G,
we treat both the body and garment in each time step as
obstacles and leverage a hair simulator [8, 9, 22, 24] to pro-
duce the animated hair strand sequence denoted as H =
{h1, ..., hn}.
This sequence provides a strong prior that
drives the 3D Gaussians attached to the strands to produce
high-fidelity hair motion, as will be discussed in Sec. 3.3.
3.2. Text-based garment diffusion model
To ensure compatibility with existing simulators, in this
work, we choose to use meshes as the coarse garment geom-
etry representation. A straightforward approach to modify
the garment mesh to match the given text prompt is through
SDS-based optimization [52, 84]. However, optimizing the
non-watertight garment mesh in a zero-shot manner is a
non-trivial task.
On one hand, the topology of garment
mesh is hard to change with noisy supervision from foun-
dational diffusion models. On the other hand, the garment
simulators all require a clean, compact, and smooth garment
mesh as input. To resolve this issue, inspired by recent suc-
cesses in 3D generative models [88, 95, 100], we utilize
large-scale garment datasets [10, 47] and learn a text-based
diffusion model for garment mesh generation. Specifically,
we first train a Variational Auto-encoder (VAE) to learn a
compact latent space capturing garment geometry distribu-
tion. We then learn a conditional latent diffusion model
within the latent space to generate garment meshes from
text prompts.
VAE for garment mesh reconstruction.
We adopt the
vectorized latent space representation [88, 95, 100] for its
simplicity and efficiency. As shown in Fig. 3 (a), given
an input garment mesh, we first uniformly sample a set of
points (denoted as X ∈R10000×3). Next, we encode the


Nicole Kidman with long 
beach waves hairstyle wearing 
a short sleeve dress of knee-
length, close-fitting, tight 
cuffs, the garment has a cozy 
autumn leaf pattern, 
featuring colorful leaves in 
shades of red, orange, and 
yellow scattered over dark 
green fabric.
!*+* + !,&-%
Initial Gaussians
Simulation-ready Avatar
Text-conditioned 
Generative Models
Generated Hair, Body 
and Garment Geometry
Animated Avatar
SDS 
Optimization
hair
body
garment
Figure 2. Overview. Given a text prompt, SimAvatar first generates hair strands, body mesh, and garment using their respective text-
conditioned generative models. We then bring them together using physics simulation, and attach 3D Gaussians to learn their appearances
and to adapt them according to the text prompts. We assign one 3D Gaussian to each line segment in the hair strands with their length
significantly larger than their diameter (green circle), whereas the Gaussians for meshes are defined within a local coordinate system of each
face (orange circle). We optimize the properties of all 3D Gaussians through the Score Distillation Sampling (SDS) loss using image-based
diffusion models, and a novel regularization Lhair for hairs to ensure plausible hair structure. The generated 3D avatar can be simulated
by any pose sequence showing realistic and dynamic motion effects such as flowing hairs and garment wrinkles.
embedding
down-sample
embedding 
cross-attention 
{!!"#}
embedding 
cross-attention 
MeshUDF
geometry encoder
geometry decoder
KL
(a) garment variational auto-encoder
(b) text-to-garment diffusion model
“A short sleeves 
dress of knee-
length, close-
fitting, tight cuffs”
BERT
…
transformer blocks $
+noise
UDF
%
&
'
%
!!"# + !$%&'
!()
Figure 3. Text-based garment diffusion model. See Sec. 3.2 for details.
sampled points to a set of vectors (denoted as Z ∈R512×16)
by applying cross-attention layers to X and its downsam-
pled version.
To effectively reconstruct garment meshes
from latent vectors, we adopt the Unsigned Distance Field
(UDF) representation [32]. The UDF is designed for non-
watertight meshes and uses the gradient at each point to de-
termine the presence of mesh surface. Specifically, we feed
query points ({qxyz}) uniformly sampled from a 3D grid
and the latent code Z to few cross-attention layers to pre-
dict the Unsigned Distance for all {qxyz}, which forms the
UDF for the garment. The garment mesh can then be ex-
tracted from the predicted UDF using MeshUDF [32]. To
train the VAE model, we follow prior works [17, 25, 32] and
apply: a) a binary cross-entropy loss (Lbce) to the predicted
Unsigned Distance, b) the L2 loss (Lgrad) to the gradient
at each query point and c) the KL divergence loss (LKL)
to the latent code Z. The full loss for the VAE training is
L = Lbce +λgradLgrad +λKLLKL, where λgrad, λKL are
empirically set to 0.0001, 0.1 in our experiments.
Text-based garment diffusion model.
Given the learned
vectorized latent space, we train a text-conditioned latent
diffusion model for garment mesh generation. As shown
in Fig. 3(b), for a latent vector Z, we add random noise
ϵ sampled from a Normal Distribution to Z and adopt a
transformer-based network (denoted as D) to recover the
added noise. To inject text prompts as conditions, we use
the BERT model [26] to extract a text embedding e ∈R768
and fuse it with latent features through cross-attention lay-
ers. The objective to train the diffusion model follows the
EDM [43, 95] and can be formulated as:
L(θD) = Eϵ∈N(0,σ2I)∥D(Z + ϵ, σ, e)) −Z∥2
2
(1)
where θD denotes the trainable parameters of the denoiser
network D and σ is a randomly chosen noise level. During
inference, a randomly sampled noise vector is gradually de-
noised to a latent code Z matching the given text prompt,
which is then decoded to a garment mesh using the decoder
in the VAE model introduced earlier.


3.3. Gaussian Avatar Optimization
To further obtain reasonable geometry of hair strands
and body shape, we utilize HAAR [78] which is a text-
conditioned diffusion model, and the BodyShapeGPT [6]
which is a GPT based LLM model to predict hair strands
and SMPL shape parameters from the given text. Given
the garment mesh, hair strands, and SMPL body mesh, we
attach 3D Gaussians to each component and optimize the
attributes of these Gaussians using foundational diffusion
models. We choose 3D Gaussians for texture modeling for
two reasons.
First, compared to implicit representations
such as SDF, 3D Gaussians are more flexible for anima-
tion and can be easily driven by meshes [65, 90]. Second,
3D Gaussians have shown impressive capacity to capture
high-fidelity appearance, especially when combined with
diffusion models priors [55, 90]. Next, we discuss how to
customize 3D Gaussians for each body part to ensure they
maximally conform to the structure and motion of that part.
3D Gaussians on body and garment meshes.
We use a
similar strategy to combine 3D Gaussians with the body and
garment part since their coarse geometry is both represented
as 3D meshes. For the body mesh, we utilize a SMPL [56]
mesh Ω= LBS(θ, β), where θ and β are the SMPL pose
and shape parameters, and LBS is the linear blend skinning
function. The garment mesh is generated and simulated as
discussed in Sec. 3.2 and Sec. 3.1. Below we discuss how to
attach and deform a 3D Gaussian to a mesh M, which could
be a body or garment mesh. Specifically, we associate each
Gaussian Gi={µi, ri, si, fi, oi} with a face of the mesh M
and define its position µi ∈R3, rotation ri ∈R3, and scal-
ing si ∈R3 in the face’s local coordinate, as well as its color
features fi ∈Rdc and opacity oi, where dc is the dimension
of the Spherical Harmonic coefficients. The face’s coor-
dinate {P(θ), R(θ), k} is defined similarly to [65], where
the origin P(θ) ∈R3 is computed as the mean position of
the face vertices, and the rotation matrix R(θ) ∈R3×3 is
formed by concatenating one edge vector of the face, the
normal vector, and their cross product. We also compute a
scalar k by the mean length of the edges. The global Gaus-
sian position, rotation, and scale {ˆµi, ˆri, ˆsi} can be com-
puted by applying the local-to-global transform:
ˆµi(θ) = kR(θ) · pi + P(θ)
ˆri(θ) = R(θ) · ri
ˆsi(θ) = ksi
(2)
We initialize the 3D Gaussians by uniformly sampling
points on the mesh surface, the face correspondences
are maintained throughout the Gaussian densification pro-
cess [44]. As observed in [90], directly optimizing Gaussian
attributes with high-variance diffusion prior-based objective
leads to noisy avatars. Thus, we adopt an implicit field Fϕ
with parameters ϕ to model the Gaussian attributes. Specif-
ically, we query the color features fi, opacity oi of each
Gaussian using its global position ˆpi(˜θ) under a canonical
pose ˜θ by (fi, oi) = Fϕ(ˆµi(˜θ)) . Note that we learn two
separate implicit fields for the body Fb
ϕ and garment Fg
ϕ to
prevent texture entanglement. The canonical garment mesh
is a garment draped on the SMPL body in T-pose. As a re-
sult, the 3D Gaussians attached to the body or garment mesh
can be smoothly driven by the avatar’s motion by Eq. 2.
3D Gaussians on hair strands.
Different from the body
and garment meshes, hair strands have a more delicate
and complex structure. As a result, the Gaussians associ-
ated with the strands are expected to have a long and thin
shape. Inspired by existing works that adopt 3D Gaussians
for hair reconstruction [57, 93], we assign one 3D Gaus-
sian to each line segment in each hair strand. As shown
in the green circle in Fig. 2, for a line segment defined by
two endpoints li and li+1, we assign a Gaussian denoted as
Gi = {µi, ri, si, fi, oi} to model the segment. To enforce
the Gaussians to be consistent with the hair strands, we ex-
plicitly compute the position, rotation, and scale of Gi by:
µi = (li + li+1)/2
si = [∥li+1 −li∥/2, γ, γ]
ri = [1 + µi · di, u × di],
(3)
where di is the direction of a hair strand, and u are unit vec-
tors along the x-axis. We set γ = 0.001 to keep the hair
Gaussians thin. To learn opacity {oi} and color {fi} for the
hair Gaussians, we similarly train an implicit field Fh
ϕ as
discussed in the garment and body part above. During in-
ference, the hair Gaussians can be driven by the hair strands
smoothly and consistently using Eq. 3.
Shading Model.
Lighting plays an important role in mod-
eling appearance details in motion such as garment wrin-
kles.
To encourage the 3D Gaussians to capture pose-
independent albedo without baked-in shading, we incorpo-
rate a Phong shading model [84] into our pipeline. Since the
normal for each Gaussian is noisy, we instead use the nor-
mal of its corresponding face (denoted as np) in the light-
ing model. To mimic random lighting, we sample the point
light position lp ∈R3, color lc ∈R3, as well as an ambient
light color la ∈R3. The shaded color of each 3D Gaus-
sian can then be computed by fi
′ = fi · (max(0, np · (lp −
ˆµi)/ ∥lp −ˆµi∥) · lc + la), where ˆµi is the global coordinate
of the Gaussian computed by Eq. 2.
Gaussian avatar optimization.
To learn the implicit
fields for the hair, body, and garment parts, we utilize
the Score Distillation Sampling (SDS) [64] objective with
a pre-trained text-to-image diffusion model [1] to super-
vise the Gaussian splatting-based rendering I(η) of our


Ours
Fantasia3D
TADA
GAvtar
David Beckham with Pompadour hairstyle wearing a long sleeve sweater, round neckline and Shorts, midthigh length, the sweater features a classic 
holiday pattern with snowflakes, reindeer, and evergreen trees in traditional colors like red, green, and white.
Black Teenager girl with afro hairstyle short hair wearing a short sleeve shirt of cropped length, buttonup front, relaxed fit, and midi length skirt with 
high-waisted, the garment has a vintage floral wallpaper pattern, featuring roses and vines in soft, muted tones.
Figure 4. Qualitative comparison with the state-of-the-art methods. See the supplementary video for more comparisons.
model, where η denotes all learnable parameters i.e., η =
{Fb
ϕ, Fg
ϕ, Fh
ϕ}. Given a text prompt T and the noise predic-
tion ˆϵ(It; T , t) of the diffusion model, SDS optimizes pa-
rameters η by minimizing the difference between the noise
ϵ added to the rendered image I(η) and the predicted noise
ˆϵ by the diffusion model:
∇ηLSDS = Et,ϵ

w(t)(ˆϵ(It; T , t) −ϵ)∂I
∂η

,
(4)
where t is the noise level, It is the noised image, and w(t)
is a weighting function. Additionally, to prevent broken
hairs caused by transparent Gaussians in the middle of a
hair strand, we propose a regularization on the opacity of
hair Gaussians. Our key intuition is that along a hair strand,
the Gaussians closer to the scalp (e.g., hair roots) should
have larger opacity values than the Gaussians further away
from the scalp (e.g., hair ends). This way the optimization
process is able to trim the extra hair to match the prompt
while avoiding the broken hair artifacts. Specifically, given
a hair point cloud h0 ∈RNs×Nl×3 as discussed in Sec. 3.1,
we sample the opacity (o ∈RNs×Nl) of its associated Gaus-
sians from the learned implicit fields (i.e., Fh
ϕ discussed in
Sec. 3.3) and add the following regularization:
Lhair =
1
NsNl
Ns
X
i=1
Nl
X
j=2
(oi,j−1 −oi,j)
(5)
Our final objective is L = LSDS +λhairLhair, where λhair
is empirically set to 1.0 in our experiments.
4. Experiments
4.1. Datasets.
To learn the text-based garment diffusion model discussed
in Sec. 3.2, we use the Garment Pattern Generator (GPG)
dataset [48] and the CLOTH3D [10] dataset processed
by [25]. For text prompts, we leverage the prompt anno-
tations for the GPG dataset from [33]. Since the CLOTH3D
dataset does not include paired prompt annotation, we ren-
der each garment on top of the SMPL body mesh and
query the GPT4v [2] with predefined questions to generate
a prompt for each garment mesh, describing its type, shape,
length, and width. Together we build a dataset containing
around 20000 meshes with paired prompt annotations. The
dataset covers common garment types such as t-shirts, tank
tops, jackets, shorts, pants, skirts, dresses, etc.


Ours
TADA
GAvtar
Emma Watson with shoulder-length wavy hair wearing a sleeveless dress of cocktail-length, the garment has a bold leopard print, with classic black 
and brown spots on a beige background.
Sandra Bullock with long shag hairstyle wearing a sleeveless tunic dress of normal length, the garment has a painterly floral watercolor pattern, 
featuring soft washes of pink, yellow, and lavender flowers.
Figure 5. Qualitative comparison of animated avatars. See the supplementary video for more animation comparisons.
4.2. Qualitative Evaluations.
We compare our synthesized avatars with start-of-the-art
text-driven 3D avatar generation methods, including Fanta-
sia3D [18], TADA [52] and GAvatar [90]. First, we present
qualitative comparisons of synthesized avatars in a canoni-
cal pose in Fig. 4. Our method not only captures diverse gar-
ment geometry (e.g., skirts, tops, and bottoms) but also pro-
duces superior texture compared to baseline models. Next,
we demonstrate animated avatars in Fig. 5. Note that since
Fantasia3D utilizes implicit representations, it cannot be
readily animated. GAvatar and TADA model the human
body and garment by a single geometry representation. For
animation, they attach garments to the human body and use
linear blending skinning for deformation. As a result, they
fail to produce realistic motion for loose garments such as
dresses. As shown by the first row of Fig. 5, when the avatar
raises her legs, only our model produces physically plausi-
ble motion for the dresses, whereas both baselines undesir-
ably separate the dresses into two pieces. We provide abun-
dant animation comparisons in the supplementary video to
showcase the difference.
4.3. Quantitative Evaluations.
User study.
We follow existing works [46, 52, 90] and
quantitatively evaluate SimAvatar through an extensive A/B
user study.
Specifically, we run SimAvatar and baseline
Metrics
TADA
Fantasia3D
GAvatar
Appearance preference
89.55
100
87.03
Motion preference
91.87
100
94.47
Table 1. User study. We provide the preference percentage of our
method against state-of-the-art methods. The higher score indi-
cates that more users favor our method. SimAvatar significantly
outperforms other methods in terms of user preference. We en-
courage looking at the supplementary video.
methods on 22 prompts. For comparison, we generate a
static 360 video of the avatar in A-pose and a video show-
ing the avatar driven by a motion sequence. At each round,
we present a pair of results by our method and one of the
baselines to a user. For the static 360 video pairs, we ask
the user to choose the method with a better appearance. For
the animated video pairs, we ask the user to pay more at-
tention to the motion. We collected 540 votes from 18 users
and present the results in Table. 1. For both appearance and
motion, SimAvatar is consistently favored by users, demon-
strating its superior performance compared to baselines.
5. Conclusions and Future Work
In this work, we proposed a novel framework for generat-
ing simulation-ready avatars with layered hair and clothing
from a text prompt. Unlike existing methods for 3D human
avatar generation, our approach represents the human body,


hair, and garments in a layered and simulation-ready struc-
ture. To this end, we first generated garment mesh, hair
strands, and body shape parameters from text-conditioned
generative models. We then optimized 3D Gaussians at-
tached to each region to learn realistic appearance.
The
generated avatars can be seamlessly animated using physics
simulators. Both qualitative and quantitative results demon-
strate the effectiveness of our method in generating realistic,
animatable clothed avatars, allowing cloth, and hair simula-
tion with dynamic effects such as wrinkles and flowing hair,
which surpasses state-of-the-art techniques.
While SimAvatar provides avatars with significantly en-
hanced realism, there are still areas for further improve-
ments. Currently, our hair and garment generation mod-
els are trained on specific datasets, which may bottleneck
the diversity due to the used training data. In future work,
we aim to explore methods for generating simulation-ready
avatars that extend beyond the existing dataset diversity.
Additionally, SimAvatar simulates garments and hair se-
quentially, which can fail in certain cases, such as avatars
wearing hoods. Implementing joint simulation for hair and
garments would allow us to accommodate more complex
garments. Finally, accessories and footwear remain entan-
gled with the body or garment layers; in the future, we plan
to focus on generating fully disentangled avatars.
References
[1] Realistic vision.
https : / / huggingface . co /
stablediffusionapi/realistic-vision-51,
2023. 2, 6
[2] Josh Achiam, Steven Adler, Sandhini Agarwal, Lama
Ahmad, Ilge Akkaya, Florencia Leoni Aleman, Diogo
Almeida, Janko Altenschmidt, Sam Altman, Shyamal
Anadkat, et al.
GPT-4 technical report.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2303.08774, 2023. 7
[3] Thiemo Alldieck, Marcus Magnor, Weipeng Xu, Christian
Theobalt, and Gerard Pons-Moll. Video based reconstruc-
tion of 3d people models. In CVPR, 2018. 3
[4] Thiemo Alldieck, Marcus Magnor, Bharat Lal Bhatnagar,
Christian Theobalt, and Gerard Pons-Moll. Learning to re-
construct people in clothing from a single rgb camera. In
CVPR, 2019.
[5] Thiemo Alldieck, Gerard Pons-Moll, Christian Theobalt,
and Marcus Magnor. Tex2shape: Detailed full human body
geometry from a single image. In ICCV, 2019. 3
[6] Baldomero R ´Arbol and Dan Casas. Bodyshapegpt: Smpl
body shape manipulation with llms. In ECCVW, 2024. 6
[7] David Baraff and Andrew Witkin. Large steps in cloth sim-
ulation. In Conference on Computer Graphics and Interac-
tive Techniques, 1998. 3
[8] Mikl´os Bergou, Max Wardetzky, Stephen Robinson, Basile
Audoly, and Eitan Grinspun. Discrete elastic rods. In SIG-
GRAPH, 2008. 4
[9] Mikl´os Bergou, Basile Audoly, Etienne Vouga, Max
Wardetzky, and Eitan Grinspun. Discrete viscous threads.
ACM Transactions on graphics (TOG), 2010. 4
[10] Hugo Bertiche, Meysam Madadi, and Sergio Escalera.
Cloth3d: clothed 3d humans. In ECCV, 2020. 3, 4, 7
[11] Hugo Bertiche, Meysam Madadi, and Sergio Escalera.
PBNS: Physically based neural simulator for unsupervised
garment pose space deformation.
ACM Transaction on
Graphics (TOG), 2020.
[12] Hugo Bertiche, Meysam Madadi, Emilio Tylson, and Ser-
gio Escalera. Deepsd: Automatic deep skinning and pose
space deformation for 3d garment animation.
In ICCV,
2021. 3
[13] Kiran S Bhat, Christopher D Twigg, Jessica K Hodgins,
Pradeep Khosla, Zoran Popovic, and Steven M Seitz. Es-
timating cloth simulation parameters from video.
SIG-
GRAPH, 2003. 3
[14] Bharat Lal Bhatnagar, Garvita Tiwari, Christian Theobalt,
and Gerard Pons-Moll.
Multi-garment net: Learning to
dress 3d people from images. In ICCV, 2019. 3
[15] Bharat Lal Bhatnagar, Cristian Sminchisescu, Christian
Theobalt, and Gerard Pons-Moll. Loopreg: Self-supervised
learning of implicit surface correspondences, pose and
shape for 3d human mesh registration. In NeurIPS, 2020. 3
[16] Yukang Cao, Yan-Pei Cao, Kai Han, Ying Shan, and Kwan-
Yee K Wong. DreamAvatar: Text-and-Shape Guided 3D
Human Avatar Generation via Diffusion Models. In CVPR,
2024. 2, 3
[17] Honghu Chen, Yuxin Yao, and Juyong Zhang.
Neural-
ABC: Neural parametric models for articulated body with
clothes. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer
Graphics, 2024. 3, 5
[18] Rui Chen, Yongwei Chen, Ningxin Jiao, and Kui Jia. Fanta-
sia3D: Disentangling Geometry and Appearance for High-
quality Text-to-3D Content Creation. In ICCV, 2023. 2, 4,
8, 13
[19] Kwang-Jin Choi and Hyeong-Seok Ko. Stable but respon-
sive cloth. In ACM SIGGRAPH Courses. 2005. 3
[20] Enric Corona, Albert Pumarola, Guillem Alenya, Ger-
ard Pons-Moll, and Francesc Moreno-Noguer.
Smplicit:
Topology-aware generative model for clothed people. In
CVPR, 2021. 3
[21] Dalle2. https://openai.com/dall-e-2, 2022. 2
[22] Gilles Daviet. Simple and scalable frictional contacts for
thin nodal objects. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG),
2020. 4
[23] Gilles Daviet. Interactive hair simulation on the gpu using
admm. In SIGGRAPH, 2023. 2, 3, 4
[24] Gilles Daviet. Interactive hair simulation on the gpu using
admm. In SIGGRAPH, 2023. 4
[25] Luca De Luigi, Ren Li, Benoit Guillard, Mathieu Salz-
mann, and Pascal Fua. DrapeNet: Garment Generation and
Self-Supervised Draping. In CVPR, 2023. 3, 5, 7
[26] Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina
Toutanova.
Bert:
Pre-training of deep bidirectional
transformers for language understanding.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:1810.04805, 2018. 5


[27] Junting Dong, Qi Fang, Zehuan Huang, Xudong Xu, Jingbo
Wang, Sida Peng, and Bo Dai1. TELA: Text to layer-wise
3d clothed human generation. In ECCV, 2024. 2, 3
[28] Yun (Raymond) Fei, Henrique Teles Maia, Christopher
Batty, Changxi Zheng, and Eitan Grinspun. A multi-scale
model for simulating liquid-hair interactions. ACM Trans-
action on Graphics (TOG), 2017. 3
[29] Jun Gao, Wenzheng Chen, Tommy Xiang, Alec Jacobson,
Morgan McGuire, and Sanja Fidler. Learning deformable
tetrahedral meshes for 3d reconstruction. In NeurIPS, 2020.
3
[30] Artur Grigorev, Bernhard Thomaszewski, Michael J Black,
and Otmar Hilliges. HOOD: Hierarchical graphs for gener-
alized modelling of clothing dynamics. In CVPR, 2023. 2,
3, 4
[31] Peng Guan, Loretta Reiss, David A Hirshberg, Alexander
Weiss, and Michael J Black. Drape: Dressing any person.
SIGGRAPH, 2012. 3
[32] Benoit Guillard, Federico Stella, and Pascal Fua. Meshudf:
Fast and differentiable meshing of unsigned distance field
networks. In ECCV, 2022. 3, 5
[33] Kai He, Kaixin Yao, Qixuan Zhang, Jingyi Yu, Lingjie Liu,
and Lan Xu. Dresscode: Autoregressively sewing and gen-
erating garments from text guidance. ACM Transactions on
Graphics (TOG), 2024. 7
[34] Fangzhou Hong, Mingyuan Zhang, Liang Pan, Zhongang
Cai, Lei Yang, and Ziwei Liu.
AvatarCLIP: Zero-Shot
Text-Driven Generation and Animation of 3D Avatars. SIG-
GRAPH, 2022. 3
[35] Jerry Hsu, Tongtong Wang, Zherong Pan, Xifeng Gao, Cem
Yuksel, and Kui Wu.
Sag-free initialization for strand-
based hybrid hair simulation. ACM Transaction of Graph-
ics, 2023. 3
[36] Shoukang Hu, Fangzhou Hong, Tao Hu, Liang Pan, Haiyi
Mei, Weiye Xiao, Lei Yang, and Ziwei Liu.
Human-
liff: Layer-wise 3d human generation with diffusion model.
arXiv preprint, 2023. 2, 3
[37] Xin Huang, Ruizhi Shao, Qi Zhang, Hongwen Zhang, and
Ying Feng. Humannorm: Learning normal diffusion model
for high-quality and realistic 3d human generation.
In
CVPR, 2024. 2
[38] Yukun Huang, Jianan Wang, Ailing Zeng, He Cao, Xi-
anbiao Qi, Yukai Shi, Zheng-Jun Zha, and Lei Zhang.
Dreamwaltz: Make a scene with complex 3d animatable
avatars. In NeurIPS, 2023. 3
[39] Yangyi Huang, Hongwei Yi, Yuliang Xiu, Tingting Liao,
Jiaxiang Tang, Deng Cai, and Justus Thies. TeCH: Text-
guided Reconstruction of Lifelike Clothed Humans.
In
3DV, 2024. 2
[40] Nikolay Jetchev. ClipMatrix: Text-controlled creation of 3d
textured meshes. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.05663, 2023.
2
[41] Boyi Jiang, Juyong Zhang, Yang Hong, Jinhao Luo, Ligang
Liu, and Hujun Bao. Bcnet: Learning body and cloth shape
from a single image. In ECCV, 2020. 3
[42] Ruixiang Jiang, Can Wang, Jingbo Zhang, Menglei Chai,
Mingming He, Dongdong Chen, and Jing Liao.
Avatar-
Craft: Transforming text into neural human avatars with
parameterized shape and pose control. In ICCV, 2023. 2, 3
[43] Tero Karras, Miika Aittala, Timo Aila, and Samuli Laine.
Elucidating the design space of diffusion-based generative
models. In NeurIPS, 2022. 5
[44] Bernhard Kerbl, Georgios Kopanas, Thomas Leimk¨uhler,
and George Drettakis. 3d gaussian splatting for real-time
radiance field rendering. SIGGRAPH, 2023. 6
[45] Taeksoo Kim, Byungjun Kim, Shunsuke Saito, and Han-
byul Joo.
GALA: Generating animatable layered assets
from a single scan. In CVPR, 2024. 3
[46] Nikos Kolotouros, Thiemo Alldieck, Andrei Zanfir, Ed-
uard Gabriel Bazavan, Mihai Fieraru, and Cristian Smin-
chisescu. Dreamhuman: Animatable 3d avatars from text.
In NeurIPS, 2023. 2, 3, 8
[47] Maria Korosteleva and Sung-Hee Lee. Generating datasets
of 3d garments with sewing patterns. In NeurIPS, 2021. 4
[48] Maria Korosteleva and Sung-Hee Lee. Generating datasets
of 3d garments with sewing patterns. In NeurIPS, 2021. 7
[49] Yifei Li, Tao Du, Kui Wu, Jie Xu, and Wojciech Matusik.
Diffcloth: Differentiable cloth simulation with dry fric-
tional contact. SIGGRAPH, 2022. 3
[50] Yifei Li, Hsiao-yu Chen, Egor Larionov, Nikolaos Sarafi-
anos, Wojciech Matusik, and Tuur Stuyck.
Diffavatar:
Simulation-ready garment optimization with differentiable
simulation. In CVPR, 2024. 3
[51] Junbang Liang, Ming C. Lin, and Vladlen Koltun. Differ-
entiable cloth simulation for inverse problems. In NeurIPS,
2019. 3
[52] Tingting Liao, Hongwei Yi, Yuliang Xiu, Jiaxiang Tang,
Yangyi Huang, Justus Thies, and Michael J Black. TADA!
text to animatable digital avatars. In 3DV, 2024. 2, 3, 4, 8,
13
[53] Chen-Hsuan
Lin,
Jun
Gao,
Luming
Tang,
Towaki
Takikawa, Xiaohui Zeng, Xun Huang, Karsten Kreis, Sanja
Fidler, Ming-Yu Liu, and Tsung-Yi Lin. Magic3D: High-
Resolution Text-to-3D Content Creation. In CVPR, 2023.
2
[54] Zhiqiu Lin, Deepak Pathak, Baiqi Li, Jiayao Li, Xide
Xia, Graham Neubig, Pengchuan Zhang, and Deva Ra-
manan. Evaluating text-to-visual generation with image-
to-text generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.01291, 2024.
13
[55] Xian Liu, Xiaohang Zhan, Jiaxiang Tang, Ying Shan, Gang
Zeng, Dahua Lin, Xihui Liu, and Ziwei Liu. Humangaus-
sian: Text-driven 3d human generation with gaussian splat-
ting. In CVPR, 2024. 2, 6, 13
[56] Matthew Loper, Naureen Mahmood, Javier Romero, Ger-
ard Pons-Moll, and Michael J. Black. SMPL: A skinned
multi-person linear model. ToG, 34(6):248:1–248:16, 2015.
2, 3, 4, 6
[57] Haimin Luo, Min Ouyang, Zijun Zhao, Suyi Jiang, Long-
wen Zhang, Qixuan Zhang, Wei Yang, Lan Xu, and Jingyi
Yu. Gaussianhair: Hair modeling and rendering with light-
aware gaussians. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.10483, 2024.
4, 6
