Title: Nimble: a non-rigid hand model with bones and muscles

NIMBLE: A Non-rigid Hand Model with Bones and Muscles
YUWEI LI∗, School of Information Science and Technology, ShanghaiTech University, China
LONGWEN ZHANG, ShanghaiTech University, China and Deemos Technology, China
ZESONG QIU, ShanghaiTech University, China
YINGWENQI JIANG, ShanghaiTech University, China
NIANYI LI, Clemson University, United States of America
YUEXIN MA, ShanghaiTech University, China
YUYAO ZHANG, ShanghaiTech University, China
LAN XU, ShanghaiTech University, China
JINGYI YU†, ShanghaiTech University, China and DGene Digital Technology, China
Fig. 1. We present NIMBLE, a non-rigid parametric hand model that includes bones and muscles, bringing 3D hand model to a new level of realism. By
enforcing the inner bones and muscles to match anatomic and kinematic rules, NIMBLE can animate 3D hands to new poses at unprecedented realism.
Emerging Metaverse applications demand reliable, accurate, and photore-
alistic reproductions of human hands to perform sophisticated operations
as if in the physical world. While real human hand represents one of the
most intricate coordination between bones, muscle, tendon, and skin, state-
of-the-art techniques unanimously focus on modeling only the skeleton of
the hand. In this paper, we present NIMBLE, a novel parametric hand model
that includes the missing key components, bringing 3D hand model to a new
level of realism. We first annotate muscles, bones and skins on the recent
Magnetic Resonance Imaging hand (MRI-Hand) dataset [Li et al. 2021] and
then register a volumetric template hand onto individual poses and subjects
∗Also with Shanghai Institute of Microsystem and Information Technology, Chinese
Academy of Sciences; University of Chinese Academy of Sciences.
†corresponding author
Authors’ addresses: Yuwei Li, School of Information Science and Technology, Shang-
haiTech University, Shanghai, China, liyw@shanghaitech.edu.cn; Longwen Zhang,
ShanghaiTech University, China and Deemos Technology, Shanghai, China, zhanglw2@
shanghaitech.edu.cn, zhanglw@deemos.com; Zesong Qiu, ShanghaiTech University,
Shanghai, China, qiuzs@shanghaitech.edu.cn; Yingwenqi Jiang, ShanghaiTech Uni-
versity, Shanghai, China, jiangywq@shanghaitech.edu.cn; Nianyi Li, Clemson Uni-
versity, Clemson, United States of America, nianyil@clemson.edu; Yuexin Ma, Shang-
haiTech University, Shanghai, China, mayuexin@shanghaitech.edu.cn; Yuyao Zhang,
ShanghaiTech University, Shanghai, China, zhangyy8@shanghaitech.edu.cn; Lan Xu,
ShanghaiTech University, Shanghai, China, xulan1@shanghaitech.edu.cn; Jingyi Yu,
ShanghaiTech University, China and DGene Digital Technology, Shanghai, China,
yujingyi@shanghaitech.edu.cn.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s).
© 2022 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
0730-0301/2022/7-ART120
https://doi.org/10.1145/3528223.3530079
within the dataset. NIMBLE consists of 20 bones as triangular meshes, 7
muscle groups as tetrahedral meshes, and a skin mesh. Via iterative shape
registration and parameter learning, it further produces shape blend shapes,
pose blend shapes, and a joint regressor. We demonstrate applying NIMBLE
to modeling, rendering, and visual inference tasks. By enforcing the inner
bones and muscles to match anatomic and kinematic rules, NIMBLE can
animate 3D hands to new poses at unprecedented realism. To model the
appearance of skin, we further construct a photometric HandStage to acquire
high-quality textures and normal maps to model wrinkles and palm print.
Finally, NIMBLE also benefits learning-based hand pose and shape estima-
tion by either synthesizing rich data or acting directly as a differentiable
layer in the inference network.
CCS Concepts: • Computing methodologies →Mesh models; Volumet-
ric models.
Additional Key Words and Phrases: hand model, mesh registration, texture,
blend skinning, parametric learning
ACM Reference Format:
Yuwei Li, Longwen Zhang, Zesong Qiu, Yingwenqi Jiang, Nianyi Li, Yuexin
Ma, Yuyao Zhang, Lan Xu, and Jingyi Yu. 2022. NIMBLE: A Non-rigid
Hand Model with Bones and Muscles. ACM Trans. Graph. 41, 4, Article 120
(July 2022), 17 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3528223.3530079
1
INTRODUCTION
In the production of animated feature films, VFX juggernauts spend
most of their time and resources on rendering face, hair and skin
complexion, as a shortcut or trick for creating realistic human and
feelings. In contrast, renderings of other parts of human body, par-
ticularly human hands, are often glossed over. The reason is simple:
VFX producers can easily direct the focus of audience attention away
ACM Trans. Graph., Vol. 41, No. 4, Article 120. Publication date: July 2022.
arXiv:2202.04533v5  [cs.CV]  18 Jul 2022


120:2
•
Li, et al.
from hands and onto hair and skin, where they can generate the
most life-like and thereby attention-grabbing visual effects. Indeed,
we rarely see scenes featuring complex and dexterous hand move-
ments. At the dawn of the Metaverse, however, emerging virtual
reality consumer products will be decidedly more intimate, immer-
sive and interactive and therefore demand life-like renderings on all
body parts, especially hands. When users put on the head-mounted
displays, their virtual hands should replace the physical ones to
perform as many operations in the Metaverse as in real life. The
dexterousness of human hands - the complex geometrical structures,
the marvelous things and the subtle messages that fingers can con-
struct, create and pass on when they move - define us humans as
intelligent beings in both physical and digital worlds.
Hands, however, are difficult to model. Through evolution, hand
movements have become an intricate orchestration of bones, mus-
cles, ligaments, nerves, and skins. Performing a specific gesture,
for example, stems from the dragging and pulling of the hand mus-
cles, which then drives the movements of the bones and eventually
changes the shape and appearance caused by muscle deformation
and skin wrinkling. To faithfully reproduce 3D hand movements, it
is critical to not only model each individual component but more
importantly to model their delicate coordination. In contrast to
tremendous efforts on 3D human body modeling [Anguelov et al.
2005; Hirshberg et al. 2012; Loper et al. 2015; Pons-Moll et al. 2015],
research on photo-realistic 3D human hands is rather limited. By far,
the majority of prior art has focused on modeling the skeleton of the
hand. In fact, the most adopted hand model, MANO [Romero et al.
2017], defines skeleton in terms of empirical joint locations without
taking into account anatomical bone structure. The recent PIANO
[Li et al. 2021] model extends MANO by employing anatomically
correct bone structures and shapes, as well as joints to connect the
bones. PIANO manages to produce more convincing movements
but the resulting appearance still lacks realism as it ignores muscles
and skins that deform along with the bones. In reality, even a rou-
tine posture such as grabbing or holding a fist requires 24 muscle
groups surrounding the hand and the wrist [Panchal-Kildare and
Malone 2013] working together to execute extension and flexion.
Shape deformations of these muscle groups subsequently affect the
appearance of their covering skins and the overall realism in virtual
hand rendering. By far, the graphics community still lacks a reliable
and practical musculoskeletal parametric hand model.
In this paper, we present NIMBLE, a Non-rIgid hand Model with
skins, Bones, and muscLEs, to bring 3D modeling of dynamic hands
to a new level of realism. Our work is enabled by the recent Mag-
netic Resonance Imaging hand (MRI-Hand) dataset [Li et al. 2021]
that captures 35 subjects (19 male 16 female), with 50 different hand
poses, along with annotated segmentation labels of bones. We first
conduct comprehensive segmentation annotations to further iden-
tify muscles and skins on the MRI-Hand dataset. Similar to how
SMPL [Loper et al. 2015] starts with an T-pose for modeling compre-
hensive movements, NIMBLE utilizes a general rest hand pose as the
template that includes 20 bones, 7 muscle groups and a skin mesh.
In particular, for the sake of computation and rendering efficiency,
we cluster 24 anatomic muscles groups to 7 while preserving as
much physical meaning as possible.
To derive a new parametric hand model, NIMBLE uses trian-
gle meshes to model bones and tetrahedral meshes for deformable
muscles and skins. The formulation manages to model shape de-
formations while maintaining structural rigidity. To register the
internal structures under the rest pose to the ones in MRI-Hand, we
present a multi-stage registration technique that leverages the ben-
efits of pose initialization, the interdependence of hand structures,
and physical-based simulations. Our technique accurately models
the elasticity of deformations without sacrificing pose accuracy. The
registered results lead to a new parametric model containing bones,
muscles, skin template meshes, kinematic tree, shape blend shapes,
pose blend shapes, and a joint regressor. In addition to parameter
learning, we further impose penalty terms to avoid collision and
enforce physically correct muscle deforms.
Applications of NIMBLE span from geometric modeling and ren-
dering to visual inference. We first demonstrate applying NIMBLE
to animate 3D hands of different shapes and under arbitrary poses.
NIMBLE provides an unprecedented level of realism by enforcing
inner bones and muscles to match anatomic and kinematic rules.
To further enhance visual realism, we construct a photometric ap-
pearance capture system called HandStage, analogous to the USC
LightStage [Debevec 2012], to acquire high-quality textures with
appearance details (e.g., normal maps), including wrinkles and palm
print. These appearance details further improve visual fidelity and
adapt to new lighting conditions. NIMBLE, as a parametric model,
can be further integrated into state-of-the-art animation systems
and rendering engines such as Blender and Unity for VR and AR
applications. Furthermore, parameter-represented NIMBLE benefits
learning-based hand pose and shape estimation on both MRI and
RGB imagery, by either synthesizing rich data with varying shapes
and poses or acting directly as a differentiable layer in the inference
network.
To summarize, our main contributions include:
• We exploit the recent MRI-Hand dataset to conduct the com-
plete segmentation annotations for bones, muscles, and skins,
as well as auto-registered meshes by optimization with phys-
ical constraints.
• We derive a parametric NIMBLE model by iterating between
shape registration and parameter learning, using new penalty
terms to guarantee physically correct bone movements and
muscle deformations.
• We demonstrate using NIMBLE for anatomically correct digi-
tal hand synthesis, motion animation and photorealistic ren-
dering. The results benefit many downstream tasks including
pose and shape inference, visual tracking, etc.
• We make available our NIMBLE model and annotation data
at https://reyuwei.github.io/proj/nimble.
2
RELATED WORK
In this section, we survey closely related works and discuss the
relationship with the proposed work.
Parametric Models. With parametric modeling, low-dimensional
parametric space is estimated to approach human body geometry.
Many existing methods incorporate linear blend skinning, which
ACM Trans. Graph., Vol. 41, No. 4, Article 120. Publication date: July 2022.


NIMBLE: A Non-rigid Hand Model with Bones and Muscles
•
120:3
deforms a mesh based non-linear combination of rigid transforma-
tions of associated bones, on top of various skeletal representations.
With skinning weights carefully designed, these presentations can
produce reasonable deformations for articulated body tissues. A pi-
oneer work on 3D morphable face is proposed by [Blanz and Vetter
1999]. Since then numerous methods have learned 3D face shape
and expression from scanning data [Allen et al. 2006; Zollhöfer et al.
2018]. The advantage of such geometric models is their ability to rep-
resent variety of face shapes and wide range of expressions. Unlike
most face models that focus only on the facial region, recent pop-
ular models FLAME [Li et al. 2017] and its extension DECA [Feng
et al. 2021] consider the whole head and neck regions instead. With
the entire head, the authors were able to assume a simulated jaw
joint to achieve large deformed facial pose and expressions. The
availability of 3D body scanners enabled learning of body shape
from scans. Since the CAESAR dataset opened up the learning of
body shape [Allen et al. 2003], most early works focus on modelling
only body shape (varying with identity) using subjects scanned
in roughly the same pose. Combining body shapes from a group
of population and different poses of a single subject, [Anguelov
et al. 2005] learned a factored model of both body shape and pose
based on triangle deformations. Following this work, many human
body parametric models were built using either triangle deforma-
tions [Hirshberg et al. 2012; Pons-Moll et al. 2015] or vertex-based
displacements [Hasler et al. 2010; Loper et al. 2015], however all
these works focus on modeling body shape and pose without the
hands or face. Comparing with face and body, human hands are
more complex for parametric modelling due to the extreme flexibil-
ity of hand motion. Early 3D hand models are typically not learned
but based on shape primitives [Melax et al. 2013; Oikonomidis et al.
2011; Schmidt et al. 2014], reconstructed with multiview stereo with
fixed shape [Ballan et al. 2012; Tzionas et al. 2016], and use non-
learned per-part scaling parameters [de la gorce et al. 2011], or use
simple shape spaces [Tkach et al. 2016]. Only recently [Khamis
et al. 2015; Li et al. 2021; Romero et al. 2017] proposed learned hand
models. [Khamis et al. 2015] collect partial depth maps of 50 people
to learn a model of shape variation, however they do not capture a
pose space. [Romero et al. 2017] on the other side learn a parametric
hand model (MANO) with both a rich shape and pose space using
3D scans of 31 subjects in up to 51 poses, following the SMPL [Loper
et al. 2015] formulation. [Li et al. 2021] built up a parametric hand
bone model from MRI data, which drove the hand shape and pose
using real bone and joint structures.
Hand Models. Hand modeling is an essential topic in computer
graphics. Many hand models have been proposed and are summa-
rized in Table 1 categorizing according to their intuitive emphasis
of the hand inner biomechanical structures [Albrecht et al. 2003; Li
et al. 2021; Wang et al. 2019, 2021] or the hand outer shape, color
and texture [Moon et al. 2020a; Qian et al. 2020; Romero et al. 2017].
Hand Inner Biomechanical Model. Hand structure and functions
are biomechanically complex. Therefore, physical-based kinetic sim-
ulation is essential to model hand pose and shapes. For example, in
early works, using simulated underlying hand skeleton to generate
a solid hand surface mesh constrain [Capell et al. 2005; Kim and
Pollard 2011; Liu et al. 2013]. Not just bones, hand skin and tendons
are also widely considered to refine the visual appearance or control
of hand articulation [Li et al. 2013; Sachdeva et al. 2015; Sueda et al.
2008]. Musculotendon modeling and simulation [Abdrashitov et al.
2021; Kadleček et al. 2016; Lee et al. 2018] have also been studied on
human body. More recently, for achieving real-human-like hand ani-
mation performance, researchers paid more attention on anatomical
structures instead of simulated models. [Mirakhorlo et al. 2018] com-
prehensively modeled biomechanical hand model based on detailed
measurements from a hand specimen, yet it is not differentiable
and can not be embedded in deep learning frameworks. [Anas et al.
2016] proposed a statistical wrist shape and bone model for au-
tomatic carpal bone segmentation. [Wang et al. 2019] acquired a
single-subject complete hand bone and muscle [Wang et al. 2021]
anatomy in multiple poses using magnetic resonance imaging (MRI),
to build an anatomy-correct hand bone rig of a target performer.
However, it suffers from time-consuming and user-specified bone
segmentation operations, which is impractical to apply to various
individuals for building a parametric model. [Li et al. 2021] construct
a parametric hand bone model named PIANO from multiple-subject
and multiple-pose MRI acquisitions, which is physically precise
and differentiable. It can be applied in deep neural networks for
computer vision tasks. However, it still lacks more comprehensive
anatomical structures such as muscle to support more realistic hand
outer surface generation.
Hand Outer Appearance Model. Fully driven by the underlying
biomechanical hand structures, skinning technique still acts as
indispensable procedure in generating high-fidelity hand anima-
tion. [Lewis et al. 2000] proposed Pose-Space Deformation (PSD)
that combines skeleton subspace deformation [Magnenat-Thalmann
et al. 1989] with artist-corrected pose shapes. It is widely used in
industry due to its speed, simplicity and the ability to incorporate
real-world scans and arbitrary artist corrections. Kry and his col-
laborators [2002] further proposed to use Principal Component
Analysis (PCA) to represent the large set of pose corrections. Re-
cently, [Romero et al. 2017] augmented an LBS-based hand sur-
face model with statistical individual- and pose-dependent paramet-
ric correctives, constructing a system referred as MANO [Romero
et al. 2017]. MANO has been widely used in variety of hand fitting
and tracking scenarios including hand interactions [Hasson et al.
2019; Mueller et al. 2019] and single RGB image hand pose estima-
tion [Baek et al. 2019]. These approaches are fully constrained by the
underlying MANO model, which lacks real biomechanically correct
constrains from the underlying hand tissue, and thus may fail to
replicate subtle details of hand geometry like creases and bulging.
Inspired by the interesting works, we construct the first complete
parametric hand model with bone, muscle, and skin. By involving
inherent kinematic structures and considering physically precise
constraints, NIMBLE enables authentic hand shape and appearance
generation and differentiable training for many down stream tasks.
3
OVERVIEW
We present a novel method for Non-rIgid hand paraMetric modeling
on Bone and MuscLE (NIMBLE). To our best knowledge, this is the
ACM Trans. Graph., Vol. 41, No. 4, Article 120. Publication date: July 2022.


120:4
•
Li, et al.
Table 1. NIMBLE vs. existing hand models.
Model
Parametric Model
Skin
Bone
Muscle
Shape
Pose
Appearance
[Albrecht et al. 2003]
×
✓
✓
✓
×
✓
×
[Wang et al. 2019]
×
✓
✓
×
✓
✓
✓
[Wang et al. 2021]
×
×
×
✓
✓
×
×
MANO [Romero et al. 2017]
✓
✓
×
×
✓
✓
×
HTML [Qian et al. 2020]
✓
✓
×
×
✓
✓
✓
PIANO [Li et al. 2021]
✓
×
✓
×
✓
✓
×
NIMBLE (Ours)
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
(a) Segmentation
(b) Original MRI slices
(c) Reconstructed Mesh
Fig. 2. (a) MRI annotation of bone and muscle mask. (b) Original slices. (c)
Reconstructed bone, muscle and skin mesh, joints are visualized in red.
first parametric hand anatomy-based algorithm that can simultane-
ously model the interior hand kinematic structure and the exterior
hand shape with the high-fidelity appearance of individuals.
NIMBLE is developed on a large amount of hand data with an-
notated inner and outer structural features. Specifically, we use the
MRI hand dataset from [Li et al. 2021] and further annotate the MRI
data to segment out the muscle and skins from the original annota-
tions, as shown in Figure 2. The hand appearances are represented
as textures with diffuse, normal, and specular maps, collected by a
photometric appearance capture system called HandStage. We then
build a parametric hand model by registering the hand template to
all the interior and exterior hand features and photometric appear-
ances in the dataset. After registration, we extend the general hand
modeling pipeline followed by [Li et al. 2021; Romero et al. 2017], so
that NIMBLE can learn a complete anatomy-based hand model with
bone, muscles and textures by iteratively fitting the hand template
to the multi-modal data and regenerating the parametric model from
the registered multi-model features. The pipeline of our method is
shown in Figure 3. The rest of the paper is organized as follows:
we firstly introduce our data collection and annotation in Section
3.1. Next, we show our model formulation in Section 4.1, followed
by a physically based registration in Section 4.2 and multi-stage
parameter learning on shape and pose in Section 4.3. After having
the hand template, we attach hand appearance to get photo-realistic
rendering effect, as discussed in Section 5. In Section 6, we evaluate
the effectiveness of NIMBLE by numerous 3D hands of different
poses, shapes, appearances, and photorealistic rendering conditions.
We also show that our method can be easily fitted into the hand
inference pipeline from various input.
Table 2. NIMBLE template mesh details. Number of semantic parts, vertices,
mesh faces and tetrahedrons.
Tissue
# parts
# vertices
# faces
# tetrahedron
Bone
20
3345
6610
-
Muscle
7
5635
10512
15986
Skin
1
5990
9984
19562
3.1
MRI Data Collection and Preparation
The dataset from [Li et al. 2021] contains 200 hand MRI volumes
spanning 50 different hand postures of 35 individual subjects. How-
ever, it only provides annotation on the bone mask and 25 joint
positions per hand. In this paper, we regenerate a fine-grained bone
segmentation mask on each MRI volume using radial basis func-
tions and joint annotation. Additionally, we handcraft binary muscle
masks on each volume slice using Amira[Amira 2022]. For time effi-
ciency, we only annotate large and notable muscle areas on each
MRI scan, and our model registration algorithm, as discussed in
Section 4.2, can automatically fill in the missing parts. As for skin
annotation, we use an automatic thresholding method [Otsu 1979]
to extract skin mask. Next, we extract the iso-surface of bone, mus-
cle and skin by applying the Marching Cubes algorithm [Lorensen
and Cline 1987] to get rough hand meshes, as shown in Fig 2(c).
4
NIMBLE
Modeling photo-realistic hand is challenging as the interior structure
of the hand, including muscles and bones, are unknown, whereas
the non-rigid and elastic property of muscles and the biomedical
connection between muscles and bones can largely determine the
exterior shape of hands. State-of-the-art solutions have neglected
this connection and thus failed at capturing realistic movement like
muscle and skin bulging. We address this issue by jointly modelling
the internal hand structure with outer appearances while consider-
ing the physical constraints of the relative motion between muscles,
bones and skins.
4.1
Model Formulation
The general formulation of NIMBLE is defined as follows:
N (𝜃, 𝛽, 𝛼) = {G(𝜃, 𝛽), A(𝛼)},
(1)
where G denotes the hand geometry, and A models the hand ap-
pearance. 𝜃, 𝛽, 𝛼are parameters controlling hand pose, shape and
ACM Trans. Graph., Vol. 41, No. 4, Article 120. Publication date: July 2022.


NIMBLE: A Non-rigid Hand Model with Bones and Muscles
•
120:5
MRI Dataset
MANO Dataset
Textured Hand 
Dataset
Inner Registration
Outer Registration
Texture Maps
Pose Model
Learning
Shape Model
Learning
Appearance 
Model
NIMBLE
,
,
Generation
Fig. 3. Overview of building NIMBLE, which includes inner and outer registration and parametric model learning. As well as NIMBLE application for synthetic
hand generation and photorealistic rendering. 𝜃, 𝛽, 𝛼are parameters that control model pose, shape and appearance.
Fig. 4. Three cutaway views of the tetrahedral mesh of our template hand.
appearance, respectively. In this section, we will focus on the model
of hand geometry.
To generate an accurate hand template, we extend the PIANO
[Li et al. 2021] pipeline, which only considers the bone structures,
shapes and joints, and add the muscle and skin features in the
template formulation G:
G(𝜃, 𝛽) = 𝐿𝐵𝑆(W, 𝐽𝑝(𝛽),𝜃, T𝑝(𝜃, 𝛽)).
(2)
where 𝐿𝐵𝑆(·) demotes the Linear Blend Skinning (LBS) function; W
is the learned skinning weight of 𝐿𝐵𝑆(·); 𝐽𝑝represent the joint loca-
tions; 𝜃is an array of joints rotation axes and angles; 𝛽is the PCA
coefficient vector of the shape space; and T𝑝is a person-specific
hand template mesh. In another word, we can formulate G of ar-
bitrary individuals by Eqn. 2, as long as we know (W, 𝐽𝑝, 𝛽,𝜃, T𝑝).
Specifically, 𝐽𝑝is defined by a joint regressor J that maps the bone
mesh vertices T𝑏to joint locations by taking into account the shape
parameters 𝛽, we refer readers to [Li et al. 2021; Loper et al. 2015] for
details. Note that we use bone mesh because joints are the essential
rotation center of bone segments, which is invariant to skin and
muscle shape.
The personalized template T𝑝is a linear combination of general
hand template T, pose blend shape 𝐵𝑃and shape blend shape 𝐵𝑆
(Eqn. 2,3,and 4 of [Romero et al. 2017]), where 𝐵𝑃is the multipli-
cation of pose blend shapes P and pose rotation matrix, and 𝐵𝑆is
the multiplication of orthonormal PCA of shape blend shape S and
𝛽. 𝐵𝑃and 𝐵𝑆can correct artifacts introduced by 𝐿𝐵𝑆(·) by adding
vertex offsets to the general template T. We use the same number of
rotation joint 𝐾= 19 as in PIANO [Li et al. 2021]. In the following
paper, we use {W, J, 𝛽,𝜃, T, P, S} to parameterize G.
Unlike the popular surface modeling methods i.e., SMPL [Loper
et al. 2015] and MANO [Romero et al. 2017], we define the general
hand template T by jointly considering the bones, muscles and
skin mesh as a whole set T = {T𝑏, T𝑚, T𝑠}. As for bones, we adopt
the triangular mesh settings in PIANO [Li et al. 2021] due to the
rigid deformation property of bones. We use tetrahedral mesh to
model muscle and skin so that NIMBLE can capture the non-rigid
motion effects such as muscle bulging and wrinkled skin. Given
that each hand has about 24 major muscles, which will significantly
increase the computation and rendering cost if NIMBLE models all
the muscles, we follow [Erolin et al. 2016; Schwarz and Taylor 1955]
and anatomically integrate the muscle groups into 7 ones based on
their functional and physical properties. As for skin template T𝑠,
we use MANO topology as an initialization. We manually register
bone, muscle and skin mesh to the same rest pose in the MRI dataset
using [R3DS 2022], so that the three components are into the same
physical space. The process takes less than 10 minutes and is only
performed once. We then remesh the registered triangular mesh of
seven muscles and skin using isotropic explicit remeshing algorithm
[Alliez et al. 2003] with a target edge length of 3mm, and create
ACM Trans. Graph., Vol. 41, No. 4, Article 120. Publication date: July 2022.


120:6
•
Li, et al.
tetrahedral meshes using Tetgen [Si 2015]. The model details are
listed in Table 2, and Figure 4 shows three cutaway views of our
template mesh with tetrahedrons. Our complete hand template mesh
consists of T with 14970 vertices and 27106 faces.
4.2
Muscle Registration
Before training the parametric hand model, we need to first register
the general template mesh T to scale the dataset within the same
topology. However, mesh registration is an open question of long-
standing, let alone our goal is to register meshes of low resolution
from a large MRI dataset. In this paper, we bypass the manual land-
mark labelling method [Wang et al. 2021], and propose a physically
based multi-stage registration algorithm that can model accurate
poses with high-quality elastic non-rigid deformation. We adopt
similar registration pipelines for muscle, bone, and skin. Here, we
present muscle registration in detail, and briefly discuss its differ-
ence compared with bone and skin registrations.
Generally, our registration pipeline consists of two steps: pose
initialization and iterative refinement. Pose initialization is to pro-
vide a good initial alignment to account for the highly nonlinear
deformation of muscle. After initialization, we iteratively update
the mesh vertex offset so that the deformed template ˆT best matches
the target one from MRI scans.
Pose Initialization. We use a simplified parametric model to ini-
tialize pose parameter ˜𝜃:
G( ˜𝜃) = 𝐿𝐵𝑆( ˜
W, ˜𝐽, ˜𝜃, ˜T).
(3)
where we removed all the shape relevant parameters in Equation (2),
including the shape parameter 𝛽, the shape blend shape S, and the
pose blend shape P. We use { ˜𝐽, ˜T} to indicate the trimmed {𝐽𝑝, T𝑝}.
˜
W is the skinning weight of this LBS function, which has been
initialized by radial basis functions (RBF) according to template
joint positions [Rhee et al. 2007]. We minimize the L2 joint error
between the posed template and target joint annotation and solve
for the inverse kinematics to obtain the initial pose ˜𝜃.
Iterative Refinement. Then, we perform non-rigid registration to
align the hand model at a finer scale. We formulate this as an energy
minimization problem to match deformed template muscle mesh
ˆT to target muscle mesh 𝑀. The objective function for non-rigid
registration is defined as:
𝐸( ˆT; 𝑀) = 𝐸𝑔𝑒𝑜+ 𝐸𝑟𝑒𝑔+ 𝐸𝑛𝑒+ 𝐸𝑎𝑡𝑡+ 𝐸𝑖𝑐𝑜𝑙+ 𝐸𝑒𝑐𝑜𝑙.
(4)
where 𝐸𝑔𝑒𝑜is geometry term, 𝐸𝑟𝑒𝑔is regularization term, 𝐸𝑛𝑒is non-
rigid elasticity term, 𝐸𝑎𝑡𝑡is the attachment constraints and 𝐸𝑖𝑐𝑜𝑙,
𝐸𝑒𝑐𝑜𝑙are the internal/external collision penalties. We will discuss
each term and their benefit in details.
Geometry Term 𝐸𝑔𝑒𝑜Inspired by the surface tracking algorithms
[Newcombe et al. 2015; Smith et al. 2020; Xu et al. 2019], we use
vertex distance and normal angle error to measure the distance
between template mesh ˆT and target mesh 𝑀:
𝐸𝑔𝑒𝑜= 𝜆𝑑𝛿𝑑( ˆT, 𝑀) + 𝜆𝑑𝑛𝛿𝑑𝑛( ˆT, 𝑀),
(5)
where 𝛿𝑑(·) measures the Chamfer Distance [Borgefors 1983] be-
tween two meshes and 𝛿𝑑𝑛(·) computes the angle between the cor-
responding vertex normal. The first term pulls the template vertex
to match with the nearest target vertex, while the second term adds
a normal penalty to prevent the template from fitted to the opposite
vertex normal.
Regularization Term 𝐸𝑟𝑒𝑔The regularization term consists of
three components, i.e., rigidity regularizer 𝐸𝑟𝑖𝑔, face normal consis-
tency regularizer 𝐸𝑓𝑛, and edge length regularizer 𝐸𝑒𝑑𝑔𝑒:
𝐸𝑟𝑒𝑔= 𝜆𝑎𝐸𝑟𝑖𝑔+ 𝜆𝑓𝑛𝐸𝑓𝑛+ 𝜆𝑒𝐸𝑒𝑑𝑔𝑒.
(6)
𝐸𝑟𝑖𝑔regularizes the deformation of vertices in ˆT by comparing
the deformation degree of adjacent vertices to avoid implausible
shapes in unobserved regions. Instead of directly regulating the
mesh node’s rotation, we add constraints on vertices:
𝐸𝑟𝑖𝑔=
∑︁
𝑣𝑖∈ˆT
∑︁
𝑣𝑗∈ˆT
𝑤𝑖𝑗(D𝑖𝑣𝑗−D𝑗𝑣𝑗),
(7)
where D𝑖represents the deformation of vertex 𝑣𝑖, and 𝑤𝑖𝑗is the
weight between vertex 𝑣𝑖and 𝑣𝑗: 𝑤𝑖𝑗= 𝑒−∥𝑣𝑖−𝑣𝑗∥2
2/2𝜎2. Higher 𝑤𝑖𝑗
corresponds to closer distance, and thus higher impact.
To regularize the moving direction of vertices, we adopt the face
normal consistency term 𝐸𝑓𝑛and edge length term 𝐸𝑒𝑑𝑔𝑒from
[Wang et al. 2018] to further ensure mesh surface smoothness and
avoid flying vertices. Specifically, the 𝐸𝑓𝑛computes the angle be-
tween the normal of each pair of neighbouring faces to ensure ˆT
of consistent face normal and smooth surface. 𝐸𝑒𝑑𝑔𝑒penalizes fly-
ing vertices that cause long edges by minimizing the average edge
length.
Non-rigid Elasticity Term 𝐸𝑛𝑒To capture non-rigid deformation
of hands, we define 𝐸𝑛𝑒using the Neo-Hookean elastic function,
which has been proven effective for muscle and flesh simulation in
[Smith et al. 2018, 2020]:
𝐸𝑛𝑒= 𝜆𝑛𝑒
∑︁
𝑖
𝑉𝑖𝜓(𝐹)
(8)
where 𝑉𝑖denotes the 𝑖𝑡ℎtetrahedron’s volume and 𝜓(𝐹) can be
viewed as energy density. 𝜓(·) ensures the deformation gradient 𝐹
to be identical and thus can effectively prevent large changes and
heavy self-collisions of muscles. Please refer to [Smith et al. 2020]
for the complete formulation of 𝜓(𝐹).
Attachment Constraints 𝐸𝑎𝑡𝑡To ensure that muscles are attached
to their corresponding bones properly, we use 𝐸𝑎𝑡𝑡to guarantee
corresponding attachment points on the mesh surface:
𝐸𝑎𝑡𝑡= 𝜆𝑎𝑡𝑡||A𝑚−A𝑏||2
2,
(9)
where A𝑚and A𝑏are hand-crafted attachment points matching on
muscle and bone mesh.
Internal Collision 𝐸𝑖𝑐𝑜𝑙To avoid hand mesh self-penetration, sim-
ilar to [Hirota et al. 2001], we penalize the internal collision by:
𝐸𝑖𝑐𝑜𝑙= 𝜆𝑐𝑜𝑙
∑︁
𝑣𝑖𝑛
||𝑛𝑇
𝑡𝑎𝑟· (𝑣𝑖𝑛−𝑣𝑡𝑎𝑟)||2
2.
(10)
where 𝑣𝑖𝑛refers to the interior penetration vertex, 𝑣𝑡𝑎𝑟is the target
surface position, and 𝑛𝑡𝑎𝑟is the corresponding surface normal 𝑛𝑡𝑎𝑟.
Due to the large search space of 𝑣𝑖𝑛and 𝑣𝑡𝑎𝑟, 𝐸𝑖𝑐𝑜𝑙can only handle
ACM Trans. Graph., Vol. 41, No. 4, Article 120. Publication date: July 2022.


NIMBLE: A Non-rigid Hand Model with Bones and Muscles
•
120:7
Fig. 5. Registered hand muscles from MRI segmentation. Observe that the muscle around the arrows become thicker and tighter after registration.
small collisions. We therefore add an additional normal and distance
filter to shrink the search space. Specifically, we discard collisions
with normal angle larger than 90◦in 𝐸𝑖𝑐𝑜𝑙to remove large self-
collision and finger penetrating the palm in ˆT.
External Collision 𝐸𝑒𝑐𝑜𝑙External collision happens between mus-
cle to muscle and muscle to bone. To eliminate this, we use the
contact loss proposed in [Hasson et al. 2019]:
𝐸𝑒𝑐𝑜𝑙= 𝜆𝑟𝑒𝑝𝐸𝑟𝑒𝑝+ (1 −𝜆𝑟𝑒𝑝)𝐸𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑟,
(11)
where 𝐸𝑟𝑒𝑝is a repulsion term, that measures the point-to-plane
distance, and 𝐸𝑎𝑡𝑡𝑟is a attraction term computing the point-to-point
distance of correspondence vertices. 𝐸𝑟𝑒𝑝detects interpenetration
points and pushes them towards the target mesh surface, the attrac-
tion term finds close vertices and force them to come into contact.
By doing so, 𝐸𝑒𝑐𝑜𝑙forces the muscle groups and bones to be adjacent
without colliding each other.
Bone and Skin Registration. The pipeline of bone and skin regis-
tration are similar to muscle’s, except that we use different term
combination and balancing weights. For bone registration, we omit
the non-rigid elasticity term 𝐸𝑛𝑒in Equation (4), considering the
rigid deformation property of bones. For skin registration, which
also requires non-rigid deformation constrains, we use all the terms
in Equation (4). The core difference is that we use larger weights
on geometry term 𝐸𝑔𝑒𝑜to align skins, as the skin annotations are
more reliable than muscles in the MRI dataset.
4.3
Parameter Learning
After registration, we have an initialized model { ˜
W, ˜J, ˜𝜃, ˜T}. The
general template mesh 𝑇and hand scans in the MRI dataset have
been aligned to the same topology. Consequently, for each subject
𝑆𝑖of hand pose 𝑃𝑗, we can generate a aligned mesh 𝑔𝑖𝑗. We then
set out to train G = {W, J, 𝛽,𝜃, T, P, S}. Note that bones, muscles,
and skins follow different anatomical and physical properties during
shape and pose change. Therefore, given MRI scans, we train G by a
multi-stage strategy to disentangle deformations by pose and shape.
Nevertheless, the public MRI datasets only contain limited numbers
of hand poses due to the high cost and time-intensity of MRI data ac-
quisition. Thus, we further optimize G using additional hand scans
from large image-based dataset to extend our pose variance.
Learning on MRI dataset. Given MRI scans, we train G through
three stages, i.e., the pose stage, the shape stage, and the parameter
stage. For each stage, we only update certain parameters while
keeping the rest fixed. The objective function is defined as follows:
𝐸1 = 𝐸𝑝𝑜(𝜃|G) + 𝐸𝑠ℎ(J, 𝛽, T, S|G) + 𝐸𝑝𝑎(W, P|G),
(12)
where 𝐸𝑝𝑜is energy term for pose stage updating the pose param-
eter 𝜃; 𝐸𝑠ℎconstrains the shape related parameters {𝛽, T, S}, and
𝐸𝑝𝑎is for parameter stage, which update W and P. To avoid col-
lision between muscles, bones and skins, we introduce a coupling
penalty term 𝐸𝑐𝑝(Equation (11) with 𝜆𝑟𝑒𝑝= 1) to 𝐸𝑝𝑜, 𝐸𝑠ℎ, and
𝐸𝑝𝑎throughout the training procedure, while assigning different
weights to balance the impact on different stage. We minimize 𝐸1
by interactively going through the three stages until convergence.
Pose stage. Given each 𝑔𝑖𝑗, ˜T, ˜J, and
˜
W, we solve for the specific
pose parameter 𝜃𝑖𝑗:
𝐸𝑝𝑜(𝜃|G) =
∑︁
𝑖∈𝑆
∑︁
𝑗∈𝑃
𝑤𝑗𝑡𝐸𝑖𝑗
𝑗𝑡+ 𝐸𝑖𝑗
𝑒𝑑𝑔𝑒+ 𝐸𝑖𝑗
𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑔+ 𝑤𝑐𝑝𝐸𝑖𝑗
𝑐𝑝.
(13)
Joint term 𝐸𝑗𝑡forces the posed template to match 𝑔𝑖𝑗by measuring
the L2 distance between posed template joint and the target joint
annotation. 𝐸𝑒𝑑𝑔𝑒measures the edge length difference between
posed template and 𝑔𝑖𝑗. Such term provides a good estimation of
pose without knowing the subject specific shape. Since metacarpals
have a limited range of motion according to [Panchal-Kildare and
Malone 2013; Wang et al. 2019], we add a regularization term to
prevent the metacarpal joints from having unrealistic rotations:
𝐸𝑖𝑗
𝑝𝑟𝑒𝑔=
∑︁
𝑖𝑗
||B(𝜃𝑖𝑗)||2,
(14)
where B(·) is a binary mask selecting only metacarpal joints.
Shape stage. We then update the shape related parameters (𝛽, S),
the joint regressor J, and the general template T in this stage.
Firstly, we optimize the subject specific template T𝑝and 𝐽𝑝, which
is directly relevant to T and J:
𝐸𝑠ℎ(T𝑝, 𝐽𝑝|G) =
∑︁
𝑖∈𝑆
∑︁
𝑗∈𝑃
𝐸𝑖𝑗
𝑔𝑒𝑜+𝐸𝑖𝑗
𝑟𝑒𝑔+𝑤𝑗𝑡𝐸𝑖𝑗
𝑗𝑡+𝑤𝑗𝑟𝑒𝑔𝐸𝑖
𝑗𝑟𝑒𝑔+𝑤𝑐𝑝𝐸𝑖𝑗
𝑐𝑝,
(15)
where 𝐸𝑔𝑒𝑜is a geometry term (Equation (5)); 𝐸𝑟𝑒𝑔the regularization
terms (Equation (6)); 𝐸𝑗𝑡is a joint term; 𝐸𝑗𝑟𝑒𝑔is a joint regularization
term. For the geometry term, We use a lower weight at the inte-
rior boundary of the muscle groups, namely the contacting vertices
ACM Trans. Graph., Vol. 41, No. 4, Article 120. Publication date: July 2022.


120:8
•
Li, et al.
between each muscle, to ensure a consistent muscle boundary. Addi-
tionally, we use 𝐸𝑟𝑒𝑔on muscle vertices to ensure smoothness. 𝐸𝑗𝑟𝑒𝑔
is a joint regularization to confine the joint locations of the subject
𝑖consistent with joints prediction from the initial joint regressor:
𝐸𝑖
𝑗𝑟𝑒𝑔= || ˜JT𝑖
𝑝−𝐽𝑖
𝑝||2
2.
(16)
After learned the T𝑝and 𝐽𝑝by optimizing 𝐸𝑠ℎ(T𝑝, 𝐽𝑝|G), we can get
J by enforcing 𝐽𝑝and JT𝑝to be equivalent. We then run principal
component analysis (PCA) on T𝑝to obtain shape space parameters
{T, S, 𝛽}, where T is the mean shape of MRI dataset T𝑝. S is the
principal component matrix, and 𝛽is the PCA coefficient vector of
the shape space.
Parameter stage. We optimize skinning weight W and pose blend
shape P by:
𝐸𝑝𝑎(W, P|G) = 𝐸𝑔𝑒𝑜+𝐸𝑟𝑒𝑔+𝑤𝑗𝑟𝑒𝑔𝐸𝑗𝑟𝑒𝑔+𝑤𝑐𝑝𝐸𝑐𝑝+𝐸𝑤𝑟𝑒𝑔+𝐸𝑝𝑏𝑟𝑒𝑔
(17)
Similar to [Loper et al. 2015], 𝐸𝑝𝑏𝑟𝑒𝑔regularize the Frobenius norm
of P to be zero, which prevents overfitting of the pose-dependent
blend shapes. 𝐸𝑤𝑟𝑒𝑔regulate the skinning weight by minimizing
the distance between W and
˜
W.
Pose Augmentation. After 𝐸1 optimization, NIMBLE can poten-
tially be directly used to better estimate hand pose because of more
reliable bone and muscle modeling. As shown in Figure 15, we are
able to provide anatomically correct and physically plausible defor-
mation compared with state-of-the-arts. However, due to limited
hand poses provided by the MRI datasets [Li et al. 2021; Wang et al.
2019], NIMBLE may suffer from degraded performance in applica-
tions requiring large hand pose variances. To address this issue, we
additionally optimize NIMBLE on hand scans from MANO dataset
[Romero et al. 2017]. MANO provides 1554 raw scans and hand
registrations align with the topology of MANO hand model. We
perform a topology transfer with a simplified physically based non-
rigid registration (Section 4.2) to inline our model to MANO dataset.
To achieve this, we compute a dense correspondence from MANO
topology to ours by manually fitting MANO to our template using
Wrap3D [R3DS 2022]. Then we run the non-rigid optimization with
geometry term, non-rigid elasticity term and dense correspondence
to match with raw scan. By doing so, we obtain another 1554 hand
registrations with large pose variance.
We follow the same parameter learning strategy as in the MRI
dataset and further optimize G learnt from MRI scans. Note that the
canonicalized MANO data only contains skin geometry, resulting
in weak supervision on bone and muscle. To prevent unexpected
deformations, we leverage an additional shape regularizer to con-
strain the deformation of inner geometry. Essentially, we want to
use the skin to guide the deformation of bone and muscle so that the
inner and outer mesh will not downgrade to the average template
in our previously registered MRI shape space. We define the shape
regularizer as follows:
𝐸𝑠𝑟𝑒𝑔=
∑︁
𝑖
||T𝑖
𝑝S𝑇||2,
(18)
where T𝑖𝑝S𝑇denotes the projected shape coefficients 𝛽𝑖on to the
MRI shape space, which corresponds to 𝛽𝑖= 0.
More parameter setting, registration and learning details can be
found in Section. 6.1.
5
PHOTOREALISTIC RENDERING
Modeling the high-quality and realistic appearance is important for
a realistic rendering pipeline. Physically-based textures, including
diffuse albedo, normal maps, specular maps, play an important role
in rendering photo-realistic hand appearance. Here, we introduce
how to model the appearance for NIMBLE, i.e., A(𝛼).
Appearance Capture. We utilize a photometric appearance capture
system that we call HandStage analogous to the USC LightStage [De-
bevec et al. 2000] to capture the detailed physically-based textures.
We are able to attain diffuse albedo, normal maps and specular maps
of hands by applying several patterns of polarized gradient illumi-
nation on them. We captured 20 hands of different identities with
our HandStage capture system to reconstruct 8192x8192 pore-level
detailed physically-based hand textures. To increase diversity, we
include extra 18 online hand texture assets from [3DSCANSTORE
2022]. Our final appearance dataset consists of 38 photo-realistic
hand texture assets from different ages, genders and races.
For rich and authentic hand appearance generation, we create a
parametric appearance model from our appearance dataset. Every
asset in our dataset have physically-based textures as well as uniform
texture UV mapping, which allows us to apply linear interpolation
between existing textures. For every appearance A𝑖in our dataset,
we compute ¯A =
1
𝑛
Í𝑛
𝑖=1 A𝑖,𝑛= 38 as the average appearance,
including average diffuse albedo, normal maps and specular maps.
Then, we run principal component analysis (PCA) using singular
value decomposition to obtain the principal components Φ from
every existing appearance in our total appearance dataset. After
that we obtain the parametric appearance model for appearance
parameter vector 𝛼∈R𝑘as
A(𝛼) = ¯A + Φ𝛼,
(19)
where 𝑘is the number of principal components, here we choose
𝑘= 10. With parametric appearance model created from PCA, we
could also generate realistic physically-based textures out of our
dataset. Since our textures have uniform texture UV mapping as our
template skin mesh, we could directly apply generated physically-
based textures NIMBLE with different shapes and produce a photo-
realistic appearance.
Rendering Process. We show our procedural rendering process
in Figure 6, we start with NIMBLE template model, and generate
shape, pose and appearance parameters randomly. NIMBLE takes
the parameters as input and generates a realistic 3D hand with bone,
muscle and skin geometry, as well as photo-realistic appearance
with diffuse map, normal map and specular map. Then we render
the 3D hand with Cycles, a photo-realistic ray-tracing renderer
[Blender 2021]. We employ image-based lighting with high dynamic
range images (HDRI) as background texture to illuminate the hand,
as shown in Figure 6. We also show a variety of different hand
poses, shapes and appearances under a uniform lighting in Figure
ACM Trans. Graph., Vol. 41, No. 4, Article 120. Publication date: July 2022.


NIMBLE: A Non-rigid Hand Model with Bones and Muscles
•
120:9
Fig. 6. Our rendering pipeline for creating photorealistic hand. Starting with our full template, we randomly generate shape, pose and appearance and render
the 3D hand with environment maps. We also show difference rending effects with only diffuse map and with normal map.
Fig. 7. Simulation of skin wrinkle due to thumb adduction. Note the wrinkle
gradually appear and skin bulges as the fingers become closer.
8. To generate a dynamic motion sequence, we map pose parame-
ters to full pose quaternion representation, and linearly interpolate
between different pose to keep a smooth pose morphing. Please
see the supplementary video for examples. To further enhance our
rendering quality, we generate skin wrinkles with cloth simulation
in rendering engines. Here we only use the surface triangles of our
volumetric mesh so that cloth simulation schemes can be applied.
See Figure 7 for an example. During the adduction of the thumb to
the index finger, the first dorsal interossei between thumb and index
finger contract and pull the bones closer, the contracted muscle
makes the skin bulge, and the purlicue skin is then squeezed to
create a fold. As can be seen in the close-up of Figure 7, the wrinkle
near purlicue gradually appears as the fingers become closer. NIM-
BLE recovers muscle and skin bulging under such pose, while cloth
simulation produces wrinkles caused by the squeezing between the
geometry of thumb and index finger.
6
EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
We first show our implementation details, then evaluate the perfor-
mance of our registration process and the NIMBLE models learned
from these registrations. We test NIMBLE on public hand datasets
and compare with state-of-the-arts, e.g., MANO [Romero et al. 2017]
and HTML [Qian et al. 2020]. Extensive experiments demonstrate
NIMBLE’s outperforming performance and capability of photo-
realistic rendering among diverse datasets. Additionally, we show
that NIMBLE can be easily fitted into the hand inference pipeline
from various input.
6.1
Implementation Details
In our experiments, we set the term weights in Equation (4) ac-
cording to template type during registration. For muscle, since the
target is not separated, we use larger regularization term weights
to guide the registration. We set 𝜆𝑑= 1, 𝜆𝑑𝑛= 1, 𝜆𝑎= 0.1, 𝜆𝑒= 0.5,
𝜆𝑓𝑛= 0.01, 𝜆𝑛𝑒= 0.02, 𝜆𝑟𝑒𝑝= 0.5, 𝜆𝑐𝑜𝑙= 0.1 and 𝜆𝑎𝑡𝑡= 10. For skin,
we set larger geometry term weights and non-rigid elasticity term
weights: 𝜆𝑑= 2, 𝜆𝑑𝑛= 2, 𝜆𝑛𝑒= 1, 𝜆𝑐𝑜𝑙= 1, 𝜆𝑎= 0.01. Specifically,
for bone, we omit the non-rigid elasticity term with 𝜆𝑛𝑒= 0. The
whole registration takes approximately 20 minutes for the muscle
group, 8 minutes for skin, and 2 minutes for bone. For parameter
learning, we also use weights to balance each term. During the first
iteration, we set the weight 𝑤𝑗𝑡and 𝑤𝑗𝑟𝑒𝑔in Equation (12) to 100 to
enforce a strong pose constraint, and decrease to them to 0.01 and 10
respectively after the first stage. We set the weight 𝑤𝑐𝑝for coupling
penalty gradually increase from 0.1 to 1 to ensure that our final
model is collision-free. We also adopt an additional optimization
process with Equation (10) and (11) to handle skin collisions with
bone and muscles during model usage. We iterate the whole process
of registration and parameter learning several times to get a stable
result. All of our experiments are performed with PyTorch auto
differentiation on an NVIDIA GeForce RTX 3090.
6.2
Registration Evaluation
Quantitative Result. In Figure 9, we plot histograms for the median
of per-vertex distance from registration to the MRI mesh and MANO
scan mesh. The distance is measured across all registered MRI data
and MANO scans. Note that we discard the inner vertices in this
evaluation. It is indicated that our method produces registrations
that generally match the target mesh within a 2 mm distance error.
For bone registration, almost all vertices have a distance error below
1.4 mm, while 87% of the vertices achieve a median distance less than
1 mm. For muscle registration, 65% of the vertices make a median
distance less than 1 mm and only 9% vertices are above 5 mm. These
are caused mainly by the missing data at the attachment part where
ACM Trans. Graph., Vol. 41, No. 4, Article 120. Publication date: July 2022.


120:10
•
Li, et al.
Fig. 8. Gallery of generated 3D Hand. Our model is able to synthesize realistic digital hand with large variance on pose, shape and appearance.
Fig. 9. The histogram of median per-vertex distance between registration
and the target surface.
muscle gets thinner and attaches to bone, as described in Section
4. We thus perform higher regularization weights and attachment
terms to increase robustness at these parts. For skin registration in
the MRI dataset, 70% of the vertices make a median distance less
than 1.5 mm, while the max distance error is 3.69 mm. While for
the MANO scan skin dataset, with our topology transfer method,
we achieve a mean error of 1.09 mm. There are 4% of vertices error
above 3 mm. This is mostly caused by incomplete scan in the dataset,
especially with object occlusion, as shown in Figure 10 (last two
rows). Meanwhile, we report the mean squared distance from scan
to registration for MANO skin is 1.76 mm.
Qualitative Result. Figure 10 shows representative registrations
sample of the MRI dataset and MANO scan dataset. For all inner
and outer data, our method provides an accurate and smooth regis-
tration. We are able to capture the muscle stretching and bulging
effects. It is notable that our registration is able to maintain a robust
performance towards noisy MRI target while capturing detail skin
wrinkles from detailed MANO scan [Romero et al. 2017].
Ablation Study. Our registration process contains two steps: LBS
pose initialization and iterative non-rigid refinement. Figure 11
visualized the registration results of each optimization step. The
LBS step serves only as a pose initialization, it is unable to capture
the details of muscle and skin bulging, especially around the thumb
muscle and hand palm. After the iterative non-rigid refinement, the
registration tightly fits the surface of the MRI mesh. Note on the top
right of Figure 11, the geometry error remains large in the middle
of the MRI muscle mesh. This is due to segmentation error, some
tendons are mislabeled as muscle because it is hard to distinguish
them on MRI slices. While using the strong regularization term in
Section 4.2, we successfully match the template to the target without
fitting it to mislabeled tendons.
To assess the impact of each of our energy terms on iterative re-
finement, we register an MRI hand mesh with multiple energy term
variants. As illustrated in Figure 12, we begin with the geometry
term and then add the regularization, non-rigid elasticity, and colli-
sion terms individually to obtain the total energy defined in Section
4.2. While the geometry term forces the vertex to align with the tar-
get, the fingers collide with one another, resulting in severe artifacts.
While adding a regularization term eliminates some artifacts, finger
collision and unnatural knuckle deformation remain. With the ad-
dition of non-rigid elasticity term, the deformations of each finger
become more realistic, but the thumb and middle finger continue
to self-penetrate. By including a collision term, the self-penetration
problem is resolved and the final collision-free registration result is
obtained.
6.3
Model Evaluation
The general method to evaluate a statistical model is to measure
its compactness and generalization [Loper et al. 2015; Romero et al.
2017]. Compactness measures the amount of variability in the train-
ing data captured by the model, while generalization measures the
model ability to represent unseen shape, pose and appearance.
Compactness. Figure 13 (a), (b) (red curve) plot the compactness of
the NIMBLE shape and pose space, respectively. These curves depict
the variance in the training data captured by a varying number of
principal components. The pose space plot shows that 15, 25, 30
components can express 83%, 92%, 95% of the full space. The result is
consistent with the anatomy of the human hand, which is generally
considered to have 27 degrees of freedom [Panchal-Kildare and
Malone 2013]. As for the shape space, as shown in Figure 13 (b),
we can note that the first principal component covers 50% of the
shape space. Meanwhile, 10 and 20 components manage to cover
83% and 93% of the complete shape space. We also plot the per-tissue
compactness curve in Figure 14(a). It indicates that the variance of
different tissues is mostly consistent.
ACM Trans. Graph., Vol. 41, No. 4, Article 120. Publication date: July 2022.
