Title: Dress-1-to-3: Single Image to Simulation-Ready 3D Outfit with Diffusion Prior and Differentiable Physics

Dress-1-to-3: Single Image to Simulation-Ready 3D Outfit with
Diffusion Prior and Differentiable Physics
XUAN LIвҲ—, UCLA
CHANG YUвҲ—, UCLA
WENXIN DUвҲ—, UCLA
YING JIANGвҲ—, UCLA
TIANYI XIE, UCLA
YUNUO CHEN, UCLA
YIN YANG, University of Utah
CHENFANFU JIANG, UCLA
Fig. 1. Dress-1-to-3 can reconstruct simulation-ready textured clothed humans from casually posed single view images.
Recent advances in large models have significantly advanced image-to-3D
reconstruction. However, the generated models are often fused into a single
piece, limiting their applicability in downstream tasks. This paper focuses on
3D garment generation, a key area for applications like virtual try-on with
dynamic garment animations, which require garments to be separable and
simulation-ready. We introduce Dress-1-to-3, a novel pipeline that recon-
structs physics-plausible, simulation-ready separated garments with sewing
patterns and humans from an in-the-wild image. Starting with the image, our
approach combines a pre-trained image-to-sewing pattern generation model
for creating coarse sewing patterns with a pre-trained multi-view diffusion
model to produce multi-view images. The sewing pattern is further refined
using a differentiable garment simulator based on the generated multi-view
images. Versatile experiments demonstrate that our optimization approach
substantially enhances the geometric alignment of the reconstructed 3D
garments and humans with the input image. Furthermore, by integrating
a texture generation module and a human motion generation module, we
вҲ—indicates equal contributions.
produce customized physics-plausible and realistic dynamic garment demon-
strations. Our project page is https://dress-1-to-3.github.io/.
1
INTRODUCTION
Creating digital assets of clothed humans is crucial for a wide range
of applications, including virtual reality (VR), the film industry, fash-
ion design, and gaming. However, the traditional pipeline for digital
human and garment creation involves multiple intricate steps, such
as concept design, material selection, garment modeling, human
pose generation, garment fitting, and animation. These processes
are often labor-intensive and time-consuming.
In recent years, significant advancements in image-to-3D asset
reconstruction have been driven by the development of powerful
image and video generation models. Among these, multiview diffu-
sion models [Chen et al. 2024c; Gao et al. 2024; Liu et al. 2023a] have
emerged as a promising approach, effectively leveraging multiview
images as intermediate representations to capture 3D information.
arXiv:2502.03449v2  [cs.CV]  21 May 2025


When fine-tuned on human datasets, these models generalize well
to avatar reconstructions from in-the-wild images [He et al. 2024a;
Li et al. 2024d]. However, the generated results are often fused into
a single piece, making them unsuitable for downstream tasks such
as garment animation and interaction.
In the meantime, sewing patterns, a foundational representation
in the garment design industry, have been adopted as intermedi-
ate reconstruction outputs to recover garment geometries [Li et al.
2024b; Liu et al. 2023b]. This representation is particularly advan-
tageous due to its seamless integration with downstream applica-
tions such as physics simulation and garment editing. Despite their
promise, these feed-forward approaches face significant limitations
stemming from the scarcity of high-quality 3D data. As a result,
the reconstructed garments are often constrained by the distribu-
tion of the training dataset, leading to inaccuracies in aligning with
input images. This limitation hinders their ability to produce de-
tailed and diverse reconstructions reflective of real-world garment
variations. The question then arises: can we keep the advantages
of the simulation-ready representation of sewing patterns while
leveraging the powerful priors in large multi-view diffusion models
to reconstruct garments from solely an in-the-wild image?
To address this problem, we introduce Dress-1-to-3, a novel gar-
ment reconstruction pipeline that accurately transforms an in-the-
wild image into a simulation-ready representation of separated hu-
man and garment by leveraging the strengths of both 2D multi-view
diffusion and 3D sewing pattern reconstruction. To bridge those two
parts, we propose a generalized and unified IPC differentiable frame-
work for garment optimization, which enables the optimization of
3D sewing patterns using 2D generative multi-view RGB images
and normal maps as guidance. By refining imperfect generative out-
puts to align with the geometry encoded in multiview images, our
approach allows the reconstruction of out-of-distribution garment
shapes with high fidelity. Our contributions include:
вҖў We propose a holistic garment reconstruction pipeline that
takes a single image as input and generates garments fitted
onto a posed human, ensuring both the human pose and
garments align with the input image.
вҖў We derive a generalized and unified IPC differentiable frame-
work that is agonistic to constitutive models. We apply this
framework for co-dimensional garment optimization.
вҖў We conduct extensive experiments to demonstrate the effec-
tiveness and versatility of our garment optimization frame-
work, successfully reconstructing garments across diverse
categories, including those not present in the training dataset.
2
RELATED WORK
2.1
Multi-view Diffusion
Owing to their powerful predictive ability, Diffusion Probabilistic
Models [Ho et al. 2020] have been applied to image [Dhariwal and
Nichol 2021; Nichol et al. 2021; Ruiz et al. 2023; Saharia et al. 2022;
Zhang et al. 2023], video [Chen et al. 2024d; Ho et al. 2022], and 3D
shape synthesis tasks [Long et al. 2024; Tang et al. 2024; Yu et al.
2024b], etc. However, applying image diffusion models to generate
multi-view images separately poses significant challenges in main-
taining consistency across different views. To address multi-view
inconsistency, multi-view attentions and camera pose controls are
adopted to fine-tune pre-trained image diffusion models, enabling
the simultaneous synthesis of multi-view images [Long et al. 2024;
Shi et al. 2023, 2024; Wang and Shi 2023; Xu et al. 2024; Yang et al.
2024], though these methods might result in compromised geomet-
ric consistency due to the lack of inherent 3D biases. To ensure both
global semantic consistency and detailed local alignment in multi-
view diffusion models, 3D-adapters [Chen et al. 2024a] propose a
plug-in module designed to infuse 3D geometry awareness. Never-
theless, the generated images by these models are sparse views. To
address this issue, CAT3D [Gao et al. 2024] introduces an efficient
parallel sampling strategy to generate a large set of camera poses,
and MVDiffusion++ [Tang et al. 2025] adopts a pose-free architec-
ture and a view dropout strategy to reduce computational costs,
generating dense, high-resolution images.
Generating consistent images from multi-view diffusions offers
guidance for further 3D shape reconstruction [Gao et al. 2024]. PSHu-
man [Li et al. 2024d] integrates a body-face cross-scale diffusion with
an SMPL-X conditioned multi-view diffusion for clothed human
reconstruction with high-quality face details. Recent work, Magic-
Man [He et al. 2024a], utilizes a hybrid human-specific multi-view
diffusion model with 3D SMPL-X-based body priors and 2D diffu-
sion priors to consistently generate dense multi-view RGB images
and normal maps, supporting high-quality human mesh reconstruc-
tion. Different from these works, we exploited multi-view diffusions
to generate multi-view normals and RGB images as guidance to
optimize sewing patterns and stitches instead of human meshes.
2.2
Garment Reconstruction
Previous work focusing on clothed human reconstruction [Xiu et al.
2023, 2022] typically generates garments fused with digital human
models, limiting them to basic skinning-based animations and re-
quiring extra segmentation and editing to separate the garments
from the human body. In contrast, our approach focuses on recon-
structing separately wearable, simulation-ready garments and hu-
man models. Other closely related works include Li et al. [2024a]; Yu
et al. [2024a], which also generates simulation-ready clothes via dif-
ferentiable simulation, but at the cost of creating clothing templates
by artists, precise point clouds by scanners or 3D shapes of garments.
NeuralTailor [Korosteleva and Lee 2022] utilizes point-level atten-
tion for pattern shape and stitching information regression, enabling
the reconstruction of garment meshes from point clouds. In contrast,
our paper focuses on reconstructing non-watertight garments and
humans separately from a single image without additional inputs.
To reconstruct separated non-watertight garments from a sin-
gle image, GarVerseLOD [Luo et al. 2024] recovers garment details
hierarchically in a coarse-to-fine framework. However, it fails to
reconstruct complex skirts or dresses with slits or with complex
human poses due to the limited representation of such features in
the training data. ClothWild [Moon et al. 2022] exploits a weakly su-
pervised pipeline with DensePose-based loss to further increase ro-
bustness on in-the-wild images. BCNet [Jiang et al. 2020] introduces
a layered garment representation and a generic skinning weight
generation network to model garments with different topologies.
Deep Fashion3D [Zhu et al. 2020] refines adaptable templates with
2


rich annotations to fit garment shapes. While they are limited to
garment categories in their training datasets, these works fail to
reconstruct complex categories such as jumpsuits. Additionally, they
require nearly frontal images as input, limiting reconstruction from
different views. AnchorUDF [Zhao et al. 2021] explores a learnable
unsigned distance function to query both 3D position features and
pixel-aligned image features via anchor points, which reconstructs
the coarse garment shape but lacks the generation of high-quality
geometric details.
Instead of directly reconstructing garment meshes, some works
[He et al. 2024b; Korosteleva and Sorkine-Hornung 2023; Liu et al.
2023b] treat sewing patterns as intermediate representations to
generate garments by stitching them together. Recent work, Gar-
mentRecovery [Li et al. 2024b], introduces implicit sewing patterns
(ISP) to provide shape priors integrated with deformation priors
for further garment recovery, though it builds specialized models
for each individual garment or garment type. Both SewFormer [Liu
et al. 2023b], and PanelFormer [Chen et al. 2024b] utilize Trans-
formers to predict sewing patterns and stitches. Concurrent work,
SewingLDM, AIpparel, Design2GarmentCode, and ChatGarment
[Bian et al. 2025; Liu et al. 2024; Nakayama et al. 2024; Zhou et al.
2025], exploits multimodal models to synthesize sewing patterns.
However, their garment results lack physical material parameters.
Therefore, they fail to reconstruct diverse shapes for garments with
different physical materials. While Wang et al. [2018] and Yang
et al. [2018] leverage a shared latent space and joint material-pose
optimization to generate 3D garments and 2D sewing patterns, their
approaches rely heavily on large-scale datasets on garment tem-
plates and human-body models, limiting their ability to generalize
to out-of-distribution garments and body shapes. Our work aims to
generate diverse, image-aligned, simulation-ready garments with
high-quality details from in-the-wild images by optimizing sewing
patterns and stitches with physical parameters via differentiable
simulations.
2.3
Differentiable Simulation
Differentiable simulation has seen widespread application in recent
research, particularly for system identification and the inference of
material parameters from both synthetic [Li et al. 2023a, 2024c] and
real-world [Huang et al. 2024; Si et al. 2024] observations. The scope
of exploration spans various domains, including fluid dynamics
and control [Li et al. 2024c, 2023b; McNamara et al. 2004; Schenck
and Fox 2018], rigid-body dynamics [Freeman et al. 2021; Strecke
and Stueckler 2021; Xu et al. 2023], articulated systems [Geilinger
et al. 2020; Qiao et al. 2021; Xu et al. 2021], soft-body dynamics [Du
et al. 2021; Hahn et al. 2019; Hu et al. 2019b; Huang et al. 2024;
Jatavallabhula et al. 2021], cloth [Li et al. 2024a, 2022; Stuyck and
Chen 2023], inelasticity [Huang et al. 2021; Li et al. 2023a], inflatable
structures [Panetta et al. 2021], and Voronoi diagrams [Numerow
et al. 2024].
Cloth-based applications, whether for static optimization or dy-
namic simulation [Grigorev et al. 2023; Santesteban et al. 2022],
frequently involve extensive frictional contact. Consequently, many
works focus on robust methods for handling dry frictional con-
tact in differentiable simulations. Bartle et al. [2016] proposes a
physics-driven pattern adjustment for garment editing using fixed-
point optimization, which does not account for gradients. Liang
et al. [2019] is the first to introduce a fully functional differentiable
cloth simulator with frictional contact and self-collision, formulat-
ing a quadratic programming problem. Jatavallabhula et al. [2021]
employs a penalty-based frictional contact model, while Du et al.
[2021] and Li et al. [2022] leverage the adjoint method for Projective
Dynamics [Bouaziz et al. 2014] with friction. Building on Position-
Based Dynamics [Macklin et al. 2016; MГјller et al. 2007], Stuyck and
Chen [2023] and Li et al. [2024a] introduce differentiable formula-
tions for compliant constraint dynamics, and Huang et al. [2024]
presents an adjoint-based framework for differentiable Incremental
Potential Contact (IPC) [Li et al. 2020, 2021].
The finite difference (FD) method [Renardy and Rogers 2006] is a
standard approach to numerical differentiation. The complex-step
finite difference technique [Luo et al. 2019; Shen et al. 2021] offers an
alternative that mitigates issues such as subtractive cancellation and
accumulated numerical errors by leveraging complex Taylor expan-
sions [Brezillon et al. 1981]. They can be used to optimize low-DoF
system [Zheng et al. 2025]. Automatic differentiation (AD) [Margos-
sian 2019; Naumann 2011] and code transformation libraries like
NVIDIA Warp [Macklin 2022], DiffTaichi [Hu et al. 2019a,b], and
others [Herholz et al. 2024] automatically compute gradients based
on forward simulation, allowing for greater reuse of existing code.
However, they can introduce code constraints, incur a high memory
footprint, and may cause gradient explosion if applied naively. Our
framework combines NVIDIA WarpвҖҷs AD with an adjoint method
to achieve both development efficiency and high performance.
3
DIFFERENTIABLE GARMENT SIMULATION
3.1
Forward Simulation
We use Codimensional Incremental Potential Contact (CIPC) [Li
et al. 2021] as our underlying garment simulation method, which
is the state-of-the-art in cloth simulation regarding accuracy and
robustness. It ensures non-penetration through distance-based log
barrier energy and continuous collision detection (CCD). Below, we
summarize the simulation pipeline, with further details available in
Li et al. [2021].
The simulated codimensional surface is discretized into triangles
defined by vertices рқ‘Ҫand faces рқ‘ӯ. Let рқ‘ҝdenote the vertex positions
in the undeformed state, and let рқ’ҷрқ‘ӣand рқ’—рқ‘ӣrepresent the vertex
positions and velocities, respectively, at time step рқ‘Ўрқ‘ӣ. CIPC employs
an optimization-based time integrator to achieve the state transition
from time step рқ‘Ўрқ‘ӣto рқ‘Ўрқ‘ӣ+1 = рқ‘Ўрқ‘ӣ+в„Һ, minimizing the following energy:
рқ’ҷрқ‘ӣ+1 = arg min
рқ’ҷ
рқҗё(рқ’ҷ) = 1
2 вҲҘрқ’ҷвҲ’Лңрқ’ҷвҲҘ2
рқ‘ҙ+ ОЁ(рқ’ҷ; рқ‘ҝ) + рқҗө(рқ’ҷ).
(1)
Here, Лңрқ’ҷ= рқ’ҷрқ‘ӣ+ рқ’—рқ‘ӣв„Һ+ рқ’Ҳв„Һ2 represents the predictive position under
backward Euler integration. вҲҘВ· вҲҘрқ‘ҙdenotes the рқҗҝ2-norm weighted
by the vertex mass рқ‘ҙрқ‘–рқ‘–. ОЁ(рқ’ҷ; рқ‘ҝ) is the elastic energy, encompass-
ing both stretching and bending energies, depending on the userвҖҷs
choice. рқҗө(рқ’ҷ) is the log barrier energy introduced by IPC, defined
over all contacting vertex-triangle and edge-edge pairs. The barrier
energy for each pair of primitives increases from zero to infinity
3


as the gap decreases from a threshold ЛҶрқ‘‘to 0, providing sufficient
repulsion to prevent penetrations.
NewtonвҖҷs method with line search is employed to solve the op-
timization problem, requiring the analytical computation of the
gradient and Hessian matrix of the energy at each iteration. The
step size upper bound in each line search is clamped by CCD to
ensure that all intermediate states remain intersection-free, pro-
vided that рқ’ҷрқ‘ӣis initially intersection-free. Finally, the new velocity
is updated as рқ’—рқ‘ӣ+1 = (рқ’ҷрқ‘ӣ+1 вҲ’рқ’ҷрқ‘ӣ)/в„Һ.
3.2
Differentiable CIPC
Huang et al. [2024] provided an analytical derivation of differen-
tiable IPC using the adjoint method. However, their derivation is
closely tied to specific choices of constitutive models. To extend
their framework to support cloth simulation, tedious derivations of
analytical derivatives are required. In this work, we present a simple
and unified framework that leverages both automatic differentiation
and the adjoint method.
The governing equation of CIPC simulation can be expressed as
an implicit nonlinear system of equations derived from the first-
order optimality condition of the minimizer for Equation 1:
рқ‘®(рқ’ҷвҲ—; рқ’ҷрқ‘ӣ, рқ’—рқ‘ӣ, рққҮрқ‘ӣ) = вҲҮрқҗё(рқ’ҷвҲ—; рқ’ҷрқ‘ӣ, рқ’—рқ‘ӣ, рққҮрқ‘ӣ) = 0,
(2)
рқ’ҷрқ‘ӣ+1 = рқ’ҷвҲ—,
рқ’—рқ‘ӣ+1 = 1
в„Һ(рқ’ҷвҲ—вҲ’рқ’ҷрқ‘ӣ),
(3)
Here, рқ’ҷвҲ—is the minimizer of the system energy рқҗё, рқ’ҷрқ‘ӣ, рқ’—рқ‘ӣrepresents
the last system state, and рққҮрқ‘ӣdenotes the set of all continuous param-
eters of the implicit equation, including shape parameters рқ‘ҝ, mass
matrix рқ‘ҙ, elastic moduli, and others. We assume рққҮрқ‘ӣare independent,
although they may share the same values. This abstraction allows
the simulator to function as a differentiable layer with рқ’ҷрқ‘ӣ, рқ’—рқ‘ӣ, рққҮрқ‘ӣ
as input and рқ’ҷрқ‘ӣ+1, рқ’—рқ‘ӣ+1 as output. The computational graph can be
handled by any auto-differentiable framework such as PyTorch. The
backward operator computes dL
dрқ’ҷрқ‘ӣ, dL
dрқ’—рқ‘ӣ, and dL
dрққҮрқ‘ӣgiven
dL
dрқ’ҷрқ‘ӣ+1 and
dL
dрқ’—рқ‘ӣ+1 for a given training loss function L.
Taking the full derivatives of Equation 2 with respect to рқ’ҷрқ‘ӣ, рқ’—рқ‘ӣ, рққҮрқ‘ӣ
on both sides, we obtain:
рқң•рқ‘®
рқң•рқ’ҷвҲ—
 dрқ’ҷвҲ—
dрқ’ҷрқ‘ӣ, dрқ’ҷвҲ—
dрқ’—рқ‘ӣ, dрқ’ҷвҲ—
dрққҮрқ‘ӣ

+
 рқң•рқ‘®
рқң•рқ’ҷрқ‘ӣ, рқң•рқҗә
рқң•рқ’—рқ‘ӣ, рқң•рқҗә
рқң•рққҮрқ‘ӣ

= 0,
(4)
which leads to
 dрқ’ҷвҲ—
dрқ’ҷрқ‘ӣ, dрқ’ҷвҲ—
dрқ’—рқ‘ӣ, dрқ’ҷвҲ—
dрққҮрқ‘ӣ

= вҲ’
 рқң•рқ‘®
рқң•рқ’ҷвҲ—
 вҲ’1  рқң•рқ‘®
рқң•рқ’ҷрқ‘ӣ, рқң•рқҗә
рқң•рқ’—рқ‘ӣ, рқң•рқҗә
рқң•рққҮрқ‘ӣ

.
(5)
By the chain rule, we have:
 dL
dрқ’ҷрқ‘ӣ, dL
dрқ’—рқ‘ӣ, dL
dрққҮрқ‘ӣ

=
dL
dрқ’ҷрқ‘ӣ+1
 dрқ’ҷрқ‘ӣ+1
dрқ’ҷрқ‘ӣ, dрқ’ҷрқ‘ӣ+1
dрқ’—рқ‘ӣ, dрқ’ҷрқ‘ӣ+1
dрққҮрқ‘ӣ

+ dL
dрқ’—рқ‘ӣ+1
 dрқ’—рқ‘ӣ+1
dрқ’ҷрқ‘ӣ, dрқ’—рқ‘ӣ+1
dрқ’—рқ‘ӣ, dрқ’—рқ‘ӣ+1
dрққҮрқ‘ӣ

.
(6)
Here, we assume dL
dрқ’ҷрқ‘ӣ, dL
dрқ’—рқ‘ӣ, and dL
dрққҮрқ‘ӣare all row vectors to ensure
dimension consistency. From Equation 3, we have:
dрқ’ҷрқ‘ӣ+1 = dрқ’ҷвҲ—,
dрқ’—рқ‘ӣ+1 = 1
в„Һ(dрқ’ҷвҲ—вҲ’dрқ’ҷрқ‘ӣ).
(7)
Plugging Equation 7 into Equation 6, we obtain:
 dL
dрқ’ҷрқ‘ӣ, dL
dрқ’—рқ‘ӣ, dL
dрққҮрқ‘ӣ

=
dL
dрқ’ҷрқ‘ӣ+1
 dрқ’ҷвҲ—
dрқ’ҷрқ‘ӣ, dрқ’ҷвҲ—
dрқ’—рқ‘ӣ, dрқ’ҷвҲ—
dрққҮрқ‘ӣ

+ 1
в„Һ
dL
dрқ’—рқ‘ӣ+1
 dрқ’ҷвҲ—
dрқ’ҷрқ‘ӣвҲ’рқ‘°, dрқ’ҷвҲ—
dрқ’—рқ‘ӣ, dрқ’ҷвҲ—
dрққҮрқ‘ӣ

.
(8)
With some rearrangements, we arrive at:
dL
dрқ’ҷрқ‘ӣ=
 dL
dрқ’ҷрқ‘ӣ+1 + 1
в„Һ
dL
dрқ’—рқ‘ӣ+1
 dрқ’ҷвҲ—
dрқ’ҷрқ‘ӣвҲ’1
в„Һ
dL
dрқ’—рқ‘ӣ+1
 dL
dрқ’—рқ‘ӣ, dL
dрққҮрқ‘ӣ

=
 dL
dрқ’ҷрқ‘ӣ+1 + 1
в„Һ
dL
dрқ’—рқ‘ӣ+1
  dрқ’ҷвҲ—
dрқ’—рқ‘ӣ, dрқ’ҷвҲ—
dрққҮрқ‘ӣ

.
(9)
Denote A =
h
dL
dрқ’ҷрқ‘ӣ+1 + 1
в„Һ
dL
dрқ’—рқ‘ӣ+1
i  рқң•рқ‘®
рқң•рқ’ҷвҲ—
 вҲ’1. By Equation 5, we have:
dL
dрқ’ҷрқ‘ӣ= вҲ’A рқң•рқ‘®
рқң•рқ’ҷрқ‘ӣвҲ’1
в„Һ
dL
dрқ’—рқ‘ӣ+1 ,
(10)
 dL
dрқ’—рқ‘ӣ, dL
dрққҮрқ‘ӣ

= вҲ’A
 рқң•рқ‘®
рқң•рқ’—рқ‘ӣ, рқң•рқ‘®
рқң•рққҮрқ‘ӣ

.
(11)
Observe that A is obtained by solving a linear system, where the
coefficient matrix рқң•рқ‘®
рқң•рқ’ҷвҲ—is the Hessian matrix of the system energy
рқҗё. The term A
h
рқң•рқ‘®
рқң•рқ’ҷрқ‘ӣ, рқң•рқ‘®
рқң•рқ’—рқ‘ӣ, рқң•рқ‘®
рқң•рққҮрқ‘ӣ
i
back-propagates the differentials in
A to рқ’ҷрқ‘ӣ, рқ’—рқ‘ӣ, and рққҮрқ‘ӣthrough рқ‘®, respectively. This process can be
implemented by treating рқ‘®as a differentiable layer that supports
auto-differentiation. Using AutoDiff, we eliminate the need to man-
ually derive the analytical expressions for рқң•рқ‘®
рқң•рқ’—рқ‘ӣand рқң•рқ‘®
рқң•рққҮрқ‘ӣ. All other
components required for forward simulations have already been
derived.
4
METHOD OVERVIEW
We start our pipeline by estimating an initial garment sewing pattern
from a single-view image. Next, we generate consistent multi-view
RGB images and their corresponding normal maps, based on which
we predict the human body pose. The 3D garment is initialized by
stitching and draping the 2D patterns onto the predicted human
model. The garmentвҖҷs interaction with the human body is simulated
using a differentiable CIPC simulator, allowing us to optimize the
physical parameters and the shapes of the sewing patterns guided by
the previously generated multi-view RGB images, normal maps, and
segmentation results. The optimized state produces a simulation-
ready scene with a human model wearing well-fitted 3D outfits
that align with the input. Garment textures are automatically gen-
erated using a visual-language model and image diffusion. Finally,
by applying our CIPC simulator, we can simulate dynamic scenes
where the predicted human body wears the optimized garments
while performing various motion sequences. An illustration of the
pipeline is shown in Figure 2. We elaborate on each component of
the pipeline in the following sections.
5
PRE-OPTIMIZATION STEPS
5.1
Simulatable Sewing Pattern Generation
From a single-view image, our pipeline starts by generating an ini-
tial sewing pattern decomposition along with stitch information
using SewFormer [Liu et al. 2023b]. Following SewFormerвҖҷs conven-
tion, the sewing pattern is represented as a set of quadratic BГ©zier
4


Multivew
Diffusion
Sewing PaоҖјern Generation
Pose Estim.
Multiview
Garment 
Initialization 
Texture
Recon.
Sim.
Phys.
Segmentation
Guidance
Garment Opt.
w. Diff. Phys.
Phys. Param.
Fig. 2. Dress-1-to-3 Pipeline. Starting with a single-view input image of a clothed human, we first derive an initial estimation of the sewing pattern.
Additionally, we employ multi-view diffusion to generate orbital camera views, which serve as ground-truth 3D information for both human pose and garment
shape. Next, we utilize differentiable simulation to sew and drape the pattern onto the posed human model, optimizing its shape and physical parameters
in conjunction with geometric regularizers. Finally, the optimized garment shape provides a physically plausible rest shape in its static state and is readily
animatable using a physical simulator.
curves on a 2D plane, forming a collection of disconnected patches.
The curves for each patch are connected to form a loop. Let E de-
note the set of all curves, with its control parameters comprising
the set of curve vertices P = {рқ‘·рқ‘–} and the set of control points
K = {рқ‘Ірқ‘’} for each edge curve рқ‘’вҲҲE. To enable garment simulation,
the patches are discretized into triangle meshes. First, we apply
arc-length parameterization to achieve uniform sampling along the
patch boundaries. For stitched patch edges, we ensure they share the
same number of sampled points. This consistency allows us to apply
vertex-to-vertex stitch constraints in garment simulations, simplify-
ing the sewing process. Using the sampled boundary points, we then
perform Delaunay triangulation [Shewchuk 2008] independently
for the interior of each patch.
Curve Vertex
Symmetry Constraint
5.1.1
Patch Symmetrization. The
sewing patterns generated by Sew-
Former often display certain sym-
metries, which we aim to pre-
serve during garment optimiza-
tion. SewFormer generates a fixed
number of patches with a pre-
defined order for patch names,
though some patches may remain
inactive. Symmetry information, including self-symmetry and inter-
symmetry, is embedded in these patch names. Symmetric edge pairs
can be automatically identified by overlapping a patch with its mir-
rored symmetric counterpart or, in the case of self-symmetry, with
the mirrored version of itself. Given the set of symmetric edge pairs
Eрқ‘Ҷ= {(рқ‘–, рқ‘—) вҲј(рқ‘ҳ,рқ‘ҷ)}, we define the validated curve vertices { ЛҶрқ‘·рқ‘–} of
the patches prior to triangulation by solving the following quadratic
optimization problem:
min
{ ЛҶрқ‘·рқ‘–}
вҲ‘пёҒ
(рқ‘–,рқ‘—)вҲј(рқ‘ҳ,рқ‘ҷ)
вҲҘ( ЛҶрқ‘·рқ‘–вҲ’ЛҶрқ‘·рқ‘—) + рқ‘№рқ‘Ҷ( ЛҶрқ‘·рқ‘ҳвҲ’ЛҶрқ‘·рқ‘ҷ)вҲҘ2
2 + рқң–
вҲ‘пёҒ
рқ‘–
вҲҘЛҶрқ‘·рқ‘–вҲ’рқ‘·рқ‘–вҲҘ2
2. (12)
Here, рқ‘№рқ‘Ҷ=
вҲ’1
0
0
1

represents the flip matrix, assuming the sym-
metry axis is vertical. This optimization involves solving a fixed-
coefficient, positive definite linear system, which ensures differentia-
bility. The validated edge control points { ЛҶрқ‘Ірқ‘’} are computed analyt-
ically by symmetrizing their relative coordinates. The symmetriza-
tion constraints are illustrated in the inset figure. Throughout this
paper, we omit the hat notation for validated vertices and control
points, as all computations are based on the symmetrized patches.
However, it is important to note that the underlying garment op-
timization variables retain the original, non-symmetry-enforced
geometry parameters.
5.1.2
Sewing Pattern Discretization. To enable direct optimization
of BГ©zier curves, we make the sampling from boundary curve pa-
rameters to mesh vertices differentiable. Both boundary sampling
and interior sampling are conceptualized as fixed-coordinate sam-
pling based on their control points. Each boundary edge curve
рқ‘’вҲҲE is defined by the starting vertex рқ‘·рқ‘’
0 , the control point рқ‘Ірқ‘’,
and the endpoint рқ‘·рқ‘’
1 (which is also the starting point of the next
edge). The curve can be differentiably parameterized as рқ‘·рқ‘’(рқ‘Ў) =
(1вҲ’рқ‘Ў)2рқ‘·рқ‘’
0 +2(1вҲ’рқ‘Ў)рқ‘Ўрқ‘Ірқ‘’+рқ‘Ў2рқ‘·рқ‘’
1 . Uniform sampling along the curve in
terms of arc length is represented as a set of parameters {рқ‘Ўрқ‘’
1, . . . ,рқ‘Ўрқ‘’рқ‘ӣрқ‘’},
with рқ‘Ҫрқ‘’
рқ‘–= рқ‘·рқ‘’(рқ‘Ўрқ‘’
рқ‘–) being the sampled points. The number of sampled
points рқ‘ӣрқ‘’may vary for different edges. After independent triangu-
lation for each patch, we compute the harmonic coordinate matrix
рқ‘ҜвҲҲRрқ‘ӣрқҗјГ—рқ‘ӣрқҗө[Joshi et al. 2007] for all the interior points, where
рқ‘ӣрқҗјis the number of interior vertices and рқ‘ӣрқҗөis the total number of
5


boundary vertices. With a slight abuse of notation, we reparameter-
ize the рқ‘—-th interior vertex as рқ‘Ҫрқҗј
рқ‘—= ГҚ
рқ‘–рқ‘Ҝрқ‘—рқ‘–рқ‘Ҫрқҗө
рқ‘–, with рқ‘Ҝрқ‘—рқ‘–denoting its
harmonic weight relative to the рқ‘–-th boundary point рқ‘Ҫрқҗө
рқ‘–. Here рқ‘Ҝрқ‘—рқ‘–is
zero if рқ‘Ҫрқҗј
рқ‘—and рқ‘Ҫрқҗө
рқ‘–do not belong to the same patch. During backprop-
agation, we fix the boundary sampling coordinates Гҗ
рқ‘’вҲҲE,рқ‘–вүӨрқ‘ӣрқ‘’{рқ‘Ўрқ‘’
рқ‘–}
and the interior harmonic coordinate matrix рқ‘Ҝ, so that the triangu-
lation is analytically determined by the original parameters of the
BГ©zier curves. These coordinates are updated only after remeshing
is performed, which will be discussed in the garment optimization
section.
5.2
Multi-view Image Generation
Given a single-view image of a full-body clothed human, we gener-
ate a set of multi-view RGB images and normal maps under orbital
camera views using a pre-trained multi-view diffusion model, Mag-
icMan [He et al. 2024a]. These multi-view images of the clothed
human are treated as ground truth data for human pose and garment
shape in the subsequent reconstruction steps.
5.3
Human Body Reconstruction
The generated garment is statically draped on a fixed human mesh.
To reduce the gap between the reconstructed garment and the image,
an accurate human body is required to correctly support the garment.
We use SMPL-X [Pavlakos et al. 2019] as our parameterized human
model. First, we apply OSX [Lin et al. 2023] to the input single-view
image to obtain an initial pose estimation рқңҪand shape estimation
рқң·. This initial estimation typically does not perfectly align with
other views, and the scaling and rotation are inconsistent across the
multi-view images. Subsequently, we fine-tune the pose based on
multi-view images using a coarse-to-fine strategy.
In the coarse stage, we estimate joint landmarks on the images
using DWPose [Yang et al. 2023]. Here, we optimize only the global
scalingрқ‘Ҷand rotation рқ‘№of the SMPL-X model based on the following
landmark loss:
LP
Land =
1
|О©|
вҲ‘пёҒ
рқ‘–
вҲҘрқ’ҳрқ‘–В·  Proj(рқ‘ұ(рқ‘Ҷ, рқ‘№, рқңҪ, рқң·); О©рқ‘–) вҲ’ВҜрқ‘ұрқ‘–
 вҲҘ2
2,
(13)
where О© = {О©рқ‘–} represents the set of camera parameters, рқ‘ұis the
3D joint location map provided by the SMPL-X model, Proj is the
projection operator from world space to screen space, ВҜрқ‘ұрқ‘–is the 2D
joint location estimated by DWPose, and рқ’ҳрқ‘–is the per-landmark
confidence score of the estimation. We use вҲҘВ· вҲҘ2
2 to denote the
mean square error (MSE). This optimization essentially estimates the
model-to-world matrix of the SMPL-X model. To further refine pose
and shape parameters, in the fine stage, we additionally incorporate
the following RGB loss and mask loss:
LP
RGB =
1
|О©|
вҲ‘пёҒ
рқ‘–
вҲҘ(рқ‘ҙрқ‘ң
рқ‘–)рқ‘җВ· (рқ‘°(рқ‘Ҷ, рқ‘№, рқңҪ, рқң·, рқ‘Әрқҗ»; О©рқ‘–) вҲ’ВҜрқ‘°рқ‘–)вҲҘ1,
(14)
LP
Mask =
1
|О©|
вҲ‘пёҒ
рқ‘–
вҲҘ(рқ‘ҙрқ‘ң
рқ‘–)рқ‘җВ· (рқ‘ҙ(рқ‘Ҷ, рқ‘№, рқңҪ, рқң·; О©рқ‘–) вҲ’ВҜрқ‘ҙрқ‘–)вҲҘ1.
(15)
Here, рқ‘Әрқҗ»represents the optimizable human body vertex color, while
рқ‘°(В·) and рқ‘ҙ(В·) denote the posed human body RGB rendering process
and contour rendering process under camera view О©рқ‘–, implemented
using Nvdiffrast [Laine et al. 2020]. ВҜрқ‘°рқ‘–and ВҜрқ‘ҙрқ‘–are the generated
multi-view RGB images and masks, respectively. рқ‘ҙрқ‘ң
рқ‘–represents the
occluded region of the human body, which includes the garment
region рқ‘ҙрқӣҪ
рқ‘–and other non-garment occlusions рқ‘ҙрқӣј
рқ‘–(such as footwear,
accessories, and hair). These regions are generated using SegFormer
[Xie et al. 2021]. The notation (В·)рқ‘җdenotes the complement of the
specified region. We use вҲҘВ· вҲҘ1 to denote the mean absolute error
(MAE). By excluding the loss computation in the occluded region, we
can accommodate loosely fitted garments. In summary, we optimize
using the following loss in the fine stage:
LP(рқ‘Ҷ, рқ‘№, рқңҪ, рқң·, рқ‘Әрқҗ») = LP
RGB + LP
Mask + рқңҶ1LP
Land + рқңҶ2вҲҘрқңҪвҲ’рқңҪ0вҲҘ1 + рқңҶ3вҲҘрқң·вҲ’рқң·0вҲҘ1.
(16)
Here, we also regularize the pose and shape parameters where рқңҪ0
and рқң·0 are their initial estimates provided by OSX.
5.4
Garment Initialization
The generated sewing patterns are positioned near the human body
and sewn together to be dressed. SewFormer provides an initial
placement around the T-posed SMPL-X model. To ensure proper
layering, we adopt a bottom-to-top strategy for fitting the entire
set of garments onto the human body, allowing the top garments
to overlay the bottom ones. Connected components are identified
by treating stitched vertices as connected. These components are
sorted vertically and sequentially fitted from bottom to top through
simulations using CIPC. After completing the T-pose fitting, the
human body is interpolated from the T-pose to the reconstructed
pose, and the entire cloth-human interaction is simulated by treating
the human in motion as a moving boundary condition. To secure
the bottom garments and prevent them from slipping during pose
interpolation, we shrink the rest shape of the triangles near the
waist to generate sufficient friction.
6
GARMENT OPTIMIZATION
6.1
Optimization Overview
In garment optimization phase, we iteratively fine tune parameters
of sewing pattern so that the statically draped garments on a posed
human body match generated multi-view images in all views. We
optimize the curve vertex set P and the control point set K of
BГ©zier curves using differentiable CIPC simulation based on the
generated multi-view images. To further leverage RGB information
for assisting the optimization, we also optimize the vertex colors рқ‘Әрқҗә
of the discretized garment mesh for RGB renderings. Additionally,
we optimize the global stretching stiffness рқң…рқ‘ and the global bending
stiffness рқң…рқ‘Ҹto automatically discover a set of physical parameters
that align with the 2D observations.
For each optimization iteration, we use CIPC simulation to stat-
ically drape the garment onto the fixed-posed human body mesh.
Leveraging the robustness of CIPC, we simulate one step of 1 second
to directly reach near-static equilibrium. Since the static equilibrium
does not locally depend on the initial state, meaning that the Jaco-
bian matrix of the simulated state with respect to the initial state is
zero, we update the initial state of iteration рқ‘ӣ, рқ’ҷрқ‘ӣ
0 , to the previously
simulated state:
рқ’ҷрқ‘ӣ
0 = Sim(рқ’ҷрқ‘ӣвҲ’1
0
; рққҮ(рқң…рқ‘ ,рқң…рқ‘Ҹ, P, K)).
(17)
6


Here, Sim represents the simulation process described in section 3.
The initial state, рқ’ҷ0
0, is obtained from the initial garment fitting de-
scribed in subsection 5.4. рққҮ(P, K) denotes the simulation rest shape
data, including nodal mass, per-stencil elastic stiffness, undistorted
material space, and similar properties. To make the simulation as
path-independent as possible, we avoid adding friction during the
process. To prevent the bottom garments from slipping down, the
boundary loop of the bottom component near the waist area is fixed.
In summary, we solve the following optimization problem:
min L(P, K,рқң…рқ‘ ,рқң…рқ‘Ҹ; рқ’ҷ, рқ’ҷ0),
(18)
where рқ’ҷrepresents the simulated state starting from initial state рқ’ҷ0,
which is iteratively updated to the previously simulated state. We
elaborate on the training losses in L that we use in the following
sections. We observe that edge curvatures K are more sensitive
than vertex positions P. Therefore, we employ a two-stage training
approach, where in the first stage, the update of K is frozen.
6.2
Rendering Losses
6.2.1
Garment Mask Loss. The dominant rendering loss we employ
is the garment mask loss. Given the multi-view ground-truth images,
we use SegFormer [Xie et al. 2021] to segment top, bottom, and dress
garment masks, assigning each component with a distinct color. The
mask loss is defined as follows:
LMask =
1
|О©|
вҲ‘пёҒ
рқ‘–
вҲҘ(рқ‘ҙрқӣј
рқ‘–)рқ‘җВ· (рқ‘ҙ(рқ’ҷ; рқ‘Әрқҗ¶, О©рқ‘–) вҲ’ВҜрқ‘ҙрқ‘–)вҲҘ1.
(19)
Here, рқ’ҷrepresents the simulated state of garments draped over the
human body. рқ‘Әрқҗ¶denotes the component color, which is discussed
in the following section. The rendered colored mask рқ‘ҙ(рқ’ҷ; рқ‘Әрқҗ¶, О©рқ‘–)
is obtained by assigning рқ‘Әрқҗ¶to the corresponding garment vertices
and setting the human body to black, ensuring that only the non-
occluded parts of the garments are rendered. ВҜрқ‘ҙрқ‘–is the set of colored
garment masks generated from multi-view RGB images. We also
exclude the loss computation in the occluded regions рқ‘ҙрқӣј
рқ‘–caused
by hair and accessories to avoid incorrect mask guidance.
Initialization of Component Colors. The component color рқ‘Әрқҗ¶is
automatically assigned prior to garment optimization. SewFormer
typically predicts garments with one or two connected components.
We vertically sort the sewn garment components and the 2D mask
regions from the first camera view. The component colors are then
assigned accordingly. If only one component is predicted but multi-
ple garment masks are present, we adjust the multi-view garment
masks to use a single color.
6.2.2
RGB and Normal Rendering Loss. We also utilize RGB and
normal rendering losses to improve garment optimization. These
losses are introduced to stabilize the training process, as the gradient
of the mask rendering loss within the interior regions of the garment
is zero. They are formulated similarly to the mask rendering loss:
LRGB =
1
|О©|
вҲ‘пёҒ
рқ‘–
вҲҘрқ‘ҙрқӣҪ
рқ‘–В· (рқ‘°(рқ’ҷ; рқ‘Әрқҗә, О©рқ‘–) вҲ’ВҜрқ‘°рқ‘–)вҲҘ1,
(20)
LNormal =
1
|О©|
вҲ‘пёҒ
рқ‘–
вҲҘрқ‘ҙрқӣҪ
рқ‘–В· (рқ‘ө(рқ’ҷ; О©рқ‘–) вҲ’ВҜрқ‘өрқ‘–)вҲҘ1.
(21)
Here, рқ‘°(рқ’ҷ; рқ‘Әрқҗә, О©рқ‘–) represents the garment RGB rendering of the
vertex color рқ‘Әрқҗәunder the camera view О©рқ‘–, and рқ‘ө(рқ’ҷ; О©рқ‘–) denotes
the corresponding normal map rendering. The sets {ВҜрқ‘°рқ‘–} and { ВҜрқ‘өрқ‘–}
are the multi-view RGB and normal images generated by the multi-
view diffusion process. The loss computation is restricted to the
garment regions рқ‘ҙрқӣҪ
рқ‘–.
6.3
Geometric Regularizers
The sewing pattern optimization under rendering losses alone is
ill-posed because, for the same sewn 3D garment mesh, there are
infinitely many ways to decompose the mesh into flattened patches.
Therefore, we incorporate several geometric losses to regularize the
sewing pattern optimization.
6.3.1
Area Ratio Loss. We use the following area ratio loss to pre-
serve the relative area of each patch with respect to the connected
component it belongs to:
LAR =
1
рқ‘Ғрқ‘ғ
вҲ‘пёҒ
рқ‘қ
 ВҜрқҗҙрқ‘қ(рқ‘ҝ)
ВҜрқҗҙрқ‘қ(рқ‘ҝ0) вҲ’1
2
,
(22)
where рқ‘Ғрқ‘ғis the number of garment patches, ВҜрқҗҙрқ‘қis the operator that
computes the ratio between the area of the рқ‘қ-th patch and the area
of the component. рқ‘ҝrepresents the current 2D discretization of the
garment patches, and рқ‘ҝ0 denotes the initial sampling.
Boundary Corner
Regularizer
6.3.2
Corner Regularizers.
Boundary Corner Regularizer.
For the boundary loops of gar-
ment components, we identify all
corner vertices of the original
BГ©zier curves. At these corners,
where two patches are typically
sewn together, we apply the fol-
lowing boundary corner regular-
izer to penalize deviations of cor-
ner angles from right angles, as illustrated in the inset figure:
LBC =
1
рқ‘Ғрқҗөрқҗ¶
вҲ‘пёҒ
рқ‘җ
(1 вҲ’рқ’…рқ‘җ
1 Г— рқ’…рқ‘җ
2).
(23)
Here, рқ‘Ғрқҗөрқҗ¶represents the total number of boundary corners, рқ’…рқ‘җ
1 and
рқ’…рқ‘җ
2 denote two consecutive unit tangent vectors at corner рқ‘җ.
Small-Angle Corner Regularizers. Small angles at patch corners
can introduce instabilities into optimization and simulation; thus,
we use the following regularizer to penalize such angles:
LSAC = вҲ’1
рқ‘Ғрқҗ¶
вҲ‘пёҒ
рқ‘җ
рқ‘ рқ‘җ(рқ‘ҝ) Вң
(рқ‘Ҫрқ‘җ
1 вҲ’рқ‘Ҫрқ‘җ
0 ) Г— Вң
(рқ‘Ҫрқ‘җ
2 вҲ’рқ‘Ҫрқ‘җ
0 ).
(24)
Here, рқ‘Ғрқҗ¶is the number of patch cor-
ners, (рқ‘Ҫрқ‘җ
1 , рқ‘Ҫрқ‘җ
0 , рқ‘Ҫрқ‘җ
2 ) is the tuple of three
consecutive discrete boundary sampling
points at the corner рқ‘җ, c
(В·) is the vector
normalization operator. рқ‘ рқ‘җ(рқ‘ҝ) is a non-
differentiable sign function: рқ‘ рқ‘җ(рқ‘ҝ) = 0
if the discretized corner angle is larger
than some threshold, otherwise, рқ‘ рқ‘җ(рқ‘ҝ)
equals the sign of the cross product on
7


the initial sewing pattern. This regularization applies to the two
cases illustrated in the inset figure. It tries to maintain the same
sign of the angle and avoid the angle becoming too small. How-
ever, BГ©zier curves may still intersect at corners even though the
discretized corner triangles are normal. We use the following dis-
cretization consistency regularizer to align the curveвҖҷs end tangents
and discrete edge directions:
LDC =
1
рқ‘Ғрқҗ¶
вҲ‘пёҒ
рқ‘җ
(2 вҲ’рққүрқ‘җ
1 В· Вң
(рқ‘Ҫрқ‘җ
1 вҲ’рқ‘Ҫрқ‘җ
0 ) вҲ’рққүрқ‘җ
2 В· Вң
(рқ‘Ҫрқ‘җ
2 вҲ’рқ‘Ҫрқ‘җ
0 )),
(25)
where рққүрқ‘җ
1,рққүрқ‘җ
2 are two consecutive end tangents of BГ©zier curves at
corner рқ‘җ.
6.3.3
Comfort Loss. In addition to the appearance of the fitting
matching the observation, we also aim to ensure that the fitting is
comfortable. We use the stretching elasticity energy to evaluate the
tightness of the fitting. To prevent overly tight fitting, we introduce
the following comfort regularizer:
LComfort =
вҲ«
вҲҘрқ‘ӯ(рқ’ҷ, рқ‘ҝ) вҲ’рқ‘№(рқ‘ӯ)вҲҘ2рқ‘‘рқ‘ҝ,
(26)
where рқ‘№(рқ‘ӯ) represents the closest rotation matrix to рқ‘ӯ. This is the
same as the as-rigid-as-possible (ARAP) stretching energy used
in the forward simulation, except that here we assume the global
stiffness is 1.
6.3.4
Laplacian Loss. To ensure the smoothness of the fitting, we
include a Laplacian regularizer:
LLap = вҲҘО”рқ’ҷвҲҘ2,
(27)
where О” represents the node-area-weighted Laplacian operator on
triangle meshes, and рқ’ҷdenotes the simulated garment vertex posi-
tions.
6.3.5
Seam Losses. The stitched curved edge pairs should have
the same shape to prevent undesired wrinkles near the seams. To
achieve this, we use a seam length regularization similar to [Li et al.
2024a] to regularize the paired stitched edges:
LSL = 1
рқ‘Ғрқ‘Ҷ
вҲ‘пёҒ
рқ‘’рқ‘–вҲјрқ‘’рқ‘—

вҲ«
вҲҘВӨрқ‘·рқ‘’рқ‘–(рқ‘Ў)вҲҘрқ‘‘рқ‘ЎвҲ’
вҲ«
вҲҘВӨрқ‘·рқ‘’рқ‘—(рқ‘Ў)вҲҘрқ‘‘рқ‘Ў
,
(28)
where рқ‘Ғрқ‘Ҷis the number of stitched seams, рқ‘’рқ‘–and рқ‘’рқ‘—iterate over all
stitched edge pairs, and ВӨрқ‘·рқ‘’(рқ‘Ў) represents the tangent vector. The
integral is computed using finite difference and the Riemann sum.
Additionally, we regularize the seam curvatures on these pairs to
preserve their initial curvatures:
LSC =
1
2рқ‘Ғрқ‘Ҷ
вҲ‘пёҒ
рқ‘’рқ‘–вҲјрқ‘’рқ‘—
вҲҘВҜKрқ‘’рқ‘–вҲ’ВҜKрқ‘’рқ‘–,0вҲҘ+ вҲҘВҜKрқ‘’рқ‘—вҲ’ВҜKрқ‘’рқ‘—,0вҲҘ,
(29)
where ВҜKрқ‘’represents the relative coordinate of the control point
within the frame of the curved edge segment рқ‘’, and ВҜKрқ‘’,0 denotes
its initial value.
6.4
Post-Iteration Processing
Occasionally, when two BГ©zier curves come close to each otherвҖ”such
as when forming a thin stripвҖ”the curves may penetrate one another
after a parameter update in some iteration. This can lead to flipped
triangles, causing the simulation to fail in the next iteration. To
Before Remesh
AоҖ№er Remesh
Pullback
Re-init.
Relax
Fig. 3. Sewing Pattern Remeshing. We perform automatic remeshing
during optimization when ill-conditioned triangles are detected. To avoid
penetration, we pull back the new discretization to the initial unoptimized
stage and rerun the garment initialization to fit it onto the human.
address this, we enforce a safeguard that modifies the geometry
in-place to prevent such occurrences. Specifically, we optimize the
negative triangle areas using a least-squares penalty after each iter-
ation рқ‘ӣ:
LFlip(P, K) = 1
|рқҗ№|
вҲ‘пёҒ
рқ‘“
(рқң–вҲ’min{рқҗҙрқ‘“(рқ‘ҝ),рқң–}) + рқңҶFlipвҲҘрқ‘ҝвҲ’рқ‘ҝрқ‘ӣ+1вҲҘ1,
(30)
where |рқҗ№| is the number of faces рқҗҙрқ‘“is the signed area of triangle
рқ‘“and рқ‘ҝрқ‘ӣ+1 is the discretized garment vertices after the parameter
update at iteration рқ‘ӣ. We optimize the above loss only if triangles
are close to flipping.
6.5
Remeshing
During optimization, we use cage deformations defined by a fixed
set of harmonic coordinates to deform a fixed number of interior
vertices. The triangulation quality can degrade significantly in re-
gions with large deformations, creating challenges for simulations.
To address this, we introduce automatic remeshing during the opti-
mization iterations when the mesh quality drops below a predefined
threshold. While rerunning the discretization on updated sewing
patterns is straightforward, directly remeshing the fitted garment
state on the human body can lead to penetrations. This occurs be-
cause the underlying smoothly interpolated surface may intersect
after re-triangulation, as the collision handling relies on the previous
discretization. To resolve this, we propose a refitting procedure that
sews and refits the garment patches onto the human body without
causing penetrations.
Assume рққҢ0 is the initial garment sewing pattern in the continuous
domain with triangulation T 0. The sewing pattern optimization at
step рқ‘ӣcan be characterized by a map ОҰрқ‘ӣfrom рққҢ0 to рққҢрқ‘ӣ, where ОҰрқ‘ӣis
a piecewise linear map defined on the continuous domain. Observe
that the initial fitting is sewn from the discretization of рққҢ0, where
SewFormer provides reasonable transformations to position the
8


panels around the human body. After generating a new triangulation
Tрқ‘ӣof рққҢрқ‘ӣ, we pull Tрқ‘ӣback to рққҢ0 as the new triangulation of рққҢ0:
ЛңT 0 вҶҗ[ОҰрқ‘ӣ]вҲ’1(Tрқ‘ӣ). We then apply the initial transformations to
the updated discretization ЛңT 0 to position the patches around the
T-pose human body and execute the fitting procedure described
in subsection 5.4. During this fitting process, we set the rest shape
as ЛңT 0. A relaxation process follows, using Tрқ‘ӣas the rest shape.
The newly fitted results are non-penetrating, and we set them as
the initial state рқ’ҷрқ‘ӣ
0 for the differentiable simulation process. Finally,
T 0 is replaced with ЛңT 0. This remeshing process is illustrated in
Figure 3.
7
POST-OPTIMIZATION STEPS
7.1
Texture Generation
To complete our pipeline and deliver a fully textured garment di-
rectly from a single image input, tailored to the needs of the garment
fabrication industry, we incorporate an additional texture genera-
tion module. Unlike formulating texture creation as a reconstruction
taskвҖ”an approach constrained by the ill-posed nature of the prob-
lem due to sparse inputs, severe distortion, and occlusions caused
by the human body and overlapping garment layersвҖ”our module
adopts generative methods to produce garment textures. This mod-
ule employs two strategies for texture generation:
Tileable Texture Generation via FabricDiffusion. In this strategy,
we assume that in real-world garment creation, clothing panels
are typically cut from a single piece of fabric and sewn together,
resulting in similar and tileable textures. Based on this assumption,
given the front-view ground truth input image and its correspond-
ing colored segmentation mask, we identify the largest uniform
color square area within the segmentation mask for each garment
component (e.g., top or bottom) as the captured texture region. This
region may exhibit distortions and varying illumination caused by
occlusions and poses in the input image. To address these issues, we
process the captured texture region using FabricDiffusion [Zhang
et al. 2024], which generates distortion-free and tileable texture
maps. To determine the appropriate tiling scale for aligning the
textures with the garmentвҖҷs UV space (optimized in our pipeline),
we assume consistent camera view parameters for the front view.
This scale can be calculated by multiplying the derivative of the
cropped regionвҖҷs size by a constant factor.
In-the-Wild Texture Generation via GPT-4o and FLUX. For general-
ized textures that do not fall into the above case, we utilize Vision-
Language Models (VLMs) in collaboration with a Diffusion model.
Specifically, we process the input image using the GPT-4o [Achiam
et al. 2023] VLM to extract descriptive keywords for the textures
of various components, such as "denim, dark blue, smooth
fabric" and "argyle, grey and white, knitted fabric"
through prompt-based querying. These extracted keywords are
then fed into FLUX [Labs 2023], which generates the corresponding
textures.
7.2
Showcase under Human Motions
The reconstructed simulation-ready garment and human model can
be used to generate realistic dynamic human motion in clothing
using the robust CIPC physics-based simulator. However, IPC-based
simulators require the initial configuration of the human model to
be penetration-free. As IPC-based simulators produce intersection-
free results, self-penetrations of the human model during the given
motion can cause solution failures when the human model interacts
with garments. To address this issue, we replace the human model
during motion with the nearest intersection-free human model by
solving Injective Deformation Processing (IDP) [Fang et al. 2021]
problems. In solving these IDP problems, we follow the method
in Li et al. [2025] where the authors use PBD simulations to re-
solve collisions between garments and human models. Instead, we
apply extended Position-Based Dynamics (XPBD) [Macklin et al.
2016] simulations to resolve self-penetrations in the human model
by repelling colliding vertices and faces, while preserving natural
deformations.
8
IMPLEMENTATION
Differentiable Simulation Layer. We implement CIPC simulation
using NVIDIA Warp [Macklin 2022] to utilize the Auto-Diff feature.
The simulator is wrapped in a customized autograd.Function to
be integrated to the global computational graph.
Balancing between Losses. The training loss is weighted sum of all
rendering losses and geometric regularizers. We use the рқҗҝMask as the
dominant loss and set the relative weights for рқҗҝRGB and рқҗҝNormal to
рқңҶRGB = 0.1 and рқңҶNormal = 0.1. For geometric regularizers, we do not
have a rule of thumb to balance them. For all experiments, we use
рқңҶLap = 0.001, рқңҶComfort = 0.1, рқңҶAR = 0.01, рқңҶSAC = 0.01, рқңҶDC = 0.001,
рқңҶBC = 0.001, рқңҶSL = 0.1, рқңҶSL = 0.1.
Training Time. The pre-optimization steps require about 10 min-
utes. The garment optimization process can be finished within 2
hours on a single RTX 3090 with 24GB device memory.
9
EXPERIMENTS
9.1
Geometry Reconstruction Comparison
We first conduct comparison study to evaluate the reconstruction
accuracy of baseline methods and our proposed approach.
Benchmark. We use the CloSe [AntiДҮ et al. 2024] and 4D-Dress
[Wang et al. 2024] datasets for the comparison study. CloSe is a large-
scale 3D clothing dataset featuring detailed segmentation across
diverse clothing classes. 4D-Dress offers high-quality 4D textured
scans of dynamic clothed human sequences. For evaluation, we care-
fully select examples encompassing a variety of human body shapes,
poses, and their corresponding front-view images to establish a
comprehensive benchmark.
Baselines. pare our method with state-of-the-art single-view gar-
ment reconstruction methods, including BCNet [Jiang et al. 2020],
ClothWild [Moon et al. 2022], GarmentRecovery [Li et al. 2024b],
and SewFormer [Liu et al. 2023b]. Among these, BCNet and Cloth-
Wild are designed for clothed human reconstruction but are limited
to tight-fitting clothing and not readily adaptable for downstream
tasks such as animation and simulation. GarmentRecovery extends
to loose-fitting garments reconstruction by deforming predicted rest
shapes to align with input images. In contrast, SewFormer predicts
9


Input
BCNet
ClothWild
GarmentRecovery
SewFormer
Ours
Fig. 4. Qualitative Comparisons of Geometry Reconstruction. Our proposed method not only generates sewing patterns that seamlessly integrate into
animation and simulation workflows but also achieves superior garment reconstruction accuracy compared to baseline methods.
corresponding sewing patterns directly from images, enabling seam-
less integration into animation pipelines and physical simulations.
Our proposed method builds upon SewFormer and incorporate dif-
ferentiable simulation to refine 2D panels and physical parameters.
For SewFormer and our approach, we simulate the predicted sewing
patterns and use the resulting 3D garments for quantitative com-
parisons.
Results. We evaluate the accuracy of baseline methods and our ap-
proach using two metrics: Chamfer Distance (CD) and Intersection
over Union (IoU). CD quantifies the geometric similarity between
10
