Title: URAvatar: Universal Relightable Gaussian Codec Avatars

URAvatar: Universal Relightable Gaussian Codec Avatars
JUNXUAN LI, Codec Avatars Lab, Meta, USA
CHEN CAO, Codec Avatars Lab, Meta, USA
GABRIEL SCHWARTZ, Codec Avatars Lab, Meta, USA
RAWAL KHIRODKAR, Codec Avatars Lab, Meta, USA
CHRISTIAN RICHARDT, Codec Avatars Lab, Meta, USA
TOMAS SIMON, Codec Avatars Lab, Meta, USA
YASER SHEIKH, Codec Avatars Lab, Meta, USA
SHUNSUKE SAITO, Codec Avatars Lab, Meta, USA
Target Expression + Lighting
Rendered Avatars
Phone Scan
URAvatar
Relightable Avatar
Fig. 1. URAvatar. Our approach enables the creation of drivable and relightable photorealistic head avatars from a single phone scan (left). The reconstructed
avatars can be driven consistently across identities under different illuminations in real time (right). https://junxuan-li.github.io/urgca-website/
We present a new approach to creating photorealistic and relightable head
avatars from a phone scan with unknown illumination. The reconstructed
avatars can be animated and relit in real time with the global illumination
of diverse environments. Unlike existing approaches that estimate para-
metric reflectance parameters via inverse rendering, our approach directly
models learnable radiance transfer that incorporates global light transport
in an efficient manner for real-time rendering. However, learning such a
complex light transport that can generalize across identities is non-trivial.
A phone scan in a single environment lacks sufficient information to infer
how the head would appear in general environments. To address this, we
build a universal relightable avatar model represented by 3D Gaussians.
Authors’ Contact Information: Junxuan Li, junxuanli@meta.com, Codec Avatars Lab,
Meta, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA; Chen Cao, chencao@meta.com, Codec Avatars
Lab, Meta, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA; Gabriel Schwartz, gbschwartz@meta.com,
Codec Avatars Lab, Meta, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA; Rawal Khirodkar, rawalk@
meta.com, Codec Avatars Lab, Meta, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA; Christian Richardt,
crichardt@meta.com, Codec Avatars Lab, Meta, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA; Tomas
Simon, tsimon@meta.com, Codec Avatars Lab, Meta, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA;
Yaser Sheikh, yasers@meta.com, Codec Avatars Lab, Meta, Pittsburgh, Pennsylva-
nia, USA; Shunsuke Saito, shunsuke.saito16@gmail.com, Codec Avatars Lab, Meta,
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s).
SA Conference Papers ’24, December 3–6, 2024, Tokyo, Japan
© 2024 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 979-8-4007-1131-2/24/12
https://doi.org/10.1145/3680528.3687653
We train on hundreds of high-quality multi-view human scans with con-
trollable point lights. High-resolution geometric guidance further enhances
the reconstruction accuracy and generalization. Once trained, we finetune
the pretrained model on a phone scan using inverse rendering to obtain a
personalized relightable avatar. Our experiments establish the efficacy of
our design, outperforming existing approaches while retaining real-time
rendering capability.
CCS Concepts: • Computing methodologies →Reconstruction; Ani-
mation.
Additional Key Words and Phrases: 3D Avatar Creation, Neural Rendering
ACM Reference Format:
Junxuan Li, Chen Cao, Gabriel Schwartz, Rawal Khirodkar, Christian Richardt,
Tomas Simon, Yaser Sheikh, and Shunsuke Saito. 2024. URAvatar: Universal
Relightable Gaussian Codec Avatars. In SIGGRAPH Asia 2024 Conference
Papers (SA Conference Papers ’24), December 3–6, 2024, Tokyo, Japan. ACM,
New York, NY, USA, 11 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3680528.3687653
1
INTRODUCTION
Photorealistic head avatars are fundamental to enabling communi-
cation in virtual environments [Lombardi et al. 2018; Ma et al. 2021].
To establish coherent presence in such environments, avatars have
to be illuminated to match the particular environment that they are
in. Consider a virtual interaction in a room with natural light shin-
ing in from a side window. If the avatars in the scene are uniformly
lit, or lit as if they were in a room with ceiling fluorescent light,
the incongruence between environment and avatars will interfere
with–and likely break–the sense of presence.
SA Conference Papers ’24, December 3–6, 2024, Tokyo, Japan.
arXiv:2410.24223v1  [cs.CV]  31 Oct 2024


2
•
Junxuan Li, Chen Cao, Gabriel Schwartz, Rawal Khirodkar, Christian Richardt, Tomas Simon, Yaser Sheikh, and Shunsuke Saito
Neck Control
Tracking/Unwrapping + Albedo Estimation
𝒟
ℰ𝑒𝑥𝑝
a) Universal Relightable Prior Model Training (Section 3.2)
345 Identities
⨂
⨂
Fully/Partially Lit 90K Frames
160 Views
Mesh
Rendered Avatar
Mesh
Albedo (uv)
ℰ𝑖𝑑
Identity Data (Average)
Expression Data
Universal Relightable Corpus
Lights
Loss (Eq. 15)
Neck
Gaze
b) Personalized Fine-tuning for Unseen Identity (Section 3.3)
c) Disentangled Light, Gaze and Neck Control
Phone Scan
𝒟
ℰ𝑒𝑥𝑝
Mesh
Rendered Avatar
Albedo (uv)
ℰ𝑖𝑑
Identity Data (Average)
Expression Data
Lights
Neck
Gaze
Mesh
Relighting
Loss (Eq. 17)
Gaze Control
Fig. 2. Method Overview. (a) We employ a large relightable corpus of multi-view facial performances to train a cross-identity decoder D that can generate
volumetric avatar representations. (b) Given a single phone scan of an unseen identity, we reconstruct the head pose, geometry, and albedo texture, and
fine-tune our pretrained relightable prior model. (c) Our final model provides disentangled control over relighting, gaze and neck control.
The challenge is that human heads are among the most complex
objects to relight accurately. Light interacts with the head in varied
ways, scattering in the skin, reflecting in the eyes and teeth, getting
trapped in hair strands, and so on. This complexity is compounded
by the diversity among human beings in facial structure, skin types,
eye colors, accessories, and hair types. Traditionally, measuring
scattering and reflectance properties to build authentic relightable
avatars has required detailed scans in multi-light capture systems.
[Bi et al. 2021; Debevec et al. 2000; Ghosh et al. 2011; Saito et al. 2024]
Such capture systems are costly and require specialists to build. The
scans themselves are time-consuming and inconvenient. To truly
build virtual communities that the majority of people can access,
we require the means to quickly and effortlessly create relightable
avatars, across the span of human diversity.
Recent approaches have attempted to drastically reduce the cap-
ture data to as little as a single input image [Lattas et al. 2020;
Yamaguchi et al. 2018] or a monocular video [Bharadwaj et al. 2023;
Wang et al. 2023a]. Yet, there remains a clear fidelity gap between
the studio-captured avatars and the ones from lightweight inputs.
In this paper, our goal is to achieve comparable relightable quality
to those studio-captured avatars from just a single phone scan.
To close the quality gap, we introduce URAvatar (pronounced
“your avatar”), a Universal Relightable Avatar prior learned from
hundreds of individuals captured with a multi-view and multi-light
capture system in an end-to-end manner. URAvatar uses a set of 3D
Gaussians [Kerbl et al. 2023] to represent the intricate geometry of
human heads and hair, and builds a prior on the joint distribution
of identity, expressions, and illumination. This enables the model-
ing of a relightable and drivable avatar with high-fidelity details
from under-constrained input as shown in Fig. 1. Unlike existing
approaches that learn priors based on parametric BDRFs [Lattas
et al. 2021; Li et al. 2020; Smith et al. 2020; Yamaguchi et al. 2018], we
build our relightable appearance prior based on learnable radiance
transfer [Saito et al. 2024] that incorporates global light transport as
a result of multi-bounce scattering and reflection. This way, we can
efficiently relight avatars with global illumination under various
environments without expensive ray tracing. Moreover, the model
can be directly supervised to reproduce the ground-truth images
without being restricted by the expressiveness of the chosen BRDF
model. For consistent drivability across identities, we balance be-
tween the explicitness of control and the scalability of training. In
particular, we choose to explicitly model eye gaze and neck rotation
in the form of linear blend skinning, as they can be reliably tracked.
On the other hand, facial expressions, including complex tongue
motions, are all learned as latent codes in a self-supervised manner
[Lombardi et al. 2018; Xu et al. 2023].
Once trained, we finetune the avatar with an input phone scan
of a new person. We reduce the domain gap between the pretrained
model and the phone scan by estimating the albedo in screen space
and unwrapping it to UV space for identity conditioning. Then,
we estimate illumination by regression and refine it via inverse
rendering. Finally, the weights of the prior model are updated to best
explain the phone scan via inverse rendering. Our carefully designed
finetuning strategy ensures that the relightability is retained from
the prior, while recovering essential person-specific details.
To measure the fidelity of our approach, we collect ground-truth
relighting data under various continuous illumination conditions
with a capture dome that consists of multiple LED screens. This
allows us to quantitatively compare the synthesis and real-world ob-
servations given known natural illumination. Our experiments show
that our approach outperforms prior methods by a large margin,
SA Conference Papers ’24, December 3–6, 2024, Tokyo, Japan.


URAvatar: Universal Relightable Gaussian Codec Avatars
•
3
and clearly demonstrates the efficacy of our prior-based relighting
that accounts for global light transport in real time.
Our principal contributions are:
(1) We introduce a universal relightable avatar prior model learned
from hundreds of dynamic performance captures with a multi-
view and multi-light system.
(2) We build a drivable head avatar from a phone scan that can
be rendered and relit with global light transport in real-time.
(3) A capture system and evaluation protocol to measure the
accuracy of relighting under continuous illuminations.
2
RELATED WORK
Authentic avatars for mass adoption must satisfy the following
criteria: they must be drivable, relightable, and lightweight enough
for anyone to create. In what follows, we discuss prior works based
on these criteria.
2.1
Drivable Avatars
In computer graphics, controlling facial expressions of avatars has
been primarily driven by visual effects and games. To enable consis-
tent control across identities, anatomically motivated FACS action
units [Friesen and Ekman 1978] are widely used as the basis of blend-
shapes [Lewis et al. 2014]. However, this basis is often insufficient to
capture person-specific variations, and tends to require additional
correctives [Li et al. 2013]. Data-driven approaches construct linear
[Blanz and Vetter 2023; Pighin et al. 2006], multi-linear [Cao et al.
2013; Vlasic et al. 2006], and non-linear [Ranjan et al. 2018; Tran and
Liu 2018] bases from captured 3D data. The FLAME model [Li et al.
2017] also incorporates linear blend skinning (LBS) for jaw and neck
motions. These approaches lack fine-grained subtle expressions as
well as tongue and eye motions. Deep appearance models [Lom-
bardi et al. 2018] propose a self-supervised method to discover the
expression latent space using variational autoencoders (VAEs). This
approach allows the driving of authentic facial expressions of users
in a fully data-driven manner. Later, LatentAvatar [Xu et al. 2023]
shows that a similar construction is possible for less constrained
setups. Cao et al. [2022] learn the latent expression space across
multiple identities to enable semantically consistent driving while
retaining person-specific expressions. While this approach works
well for relatively small deformations, large deformations caused
by articulations, such as neck or eye motions, lead to undesired
artifacts. To address this, our work combines the latent expression
codes with explicit eye models [Li et al. 2022; Schwartz et al. 2020]
and neck articulations via LBS [Li et al. 2017], further enhancing
the drivability and fidelity.
2.2
Lightweight Avatar Generation
Early works on photorealistic human digitization required dedicated
reconstruction pipelines and capture systems for individual compo-
nents including hair [Echevarria et al. 2014; Luo et al. 2013; Nam et al.
2019], face[Debevec et al. 2000; Ghosh et al. 2011], eyes [Bérard et al.
2014], and inner mouth [Wu et al. 2016]. While these approaches
are non-trivial to scale for large-scale identities, Ichim et al. [2015]
show the promise of reconstructing personalized avatars from a
phone scan. Follow-up works support more diverse hair styles [Cao
et al. 2016] or enable reconstruction from a single image [Hu et al.
2017; Nagano et al. 2018]. However, these approaches tend to lack
photorealism due to the limited expressiveness of the underlying
morphable models and/or mesh representations. More recently, neu-
ral fields [Xie et al. 2022], including NeRF [Mildenhall et al. 2021],
show remarkable progress on modeling complex geometry and
appearance. This is also extended to avatar reconstructions from
casually captured video data [Athar et al. 2023, 2022; Gafni et al.
2021; Grassal et al. 2022; Zheng et al. 2021; Zielonka et al. 2023].
While NeRF and its variants are slow to render, neural rendering
approaches based on Mixture of Volumetric Primitives [Cao et al.
2022; Lombardi et al. 2021] or Neural Deferred Rendering [Thies
et al. 2019; Wang et al. 2023b] show the ability to render 3D avatars
in real-time for interactive applications. Despite impressive progress
on modeling authentic avatars from lightweight inputs, the common
limitation of these approaches is that the illumination is baked into
the appearance model and avatars cannot be relit under different
environments.
2.3
Avatar Relighting
Relighting is a critical property to enable photorealistic composition
of avatars into a scene. Debevec et al. [2000] show that one-light-
at-a-time (OLAT) capture can be used to recover reflectance fields.
The follow-up work further supports dynamics relighting [Peers
et al. 2007] and accelerates the acquisition process by leveraging
spherical gradient illuminations [Fyffe et al. 2016; Ghosh et al. 2011;
Ma et al. 2007]. Despite high-fidelity outputs, it remains non-trivial
to widely adopt such a system. While the work by Sengupta et al.
[2021] reduces the hardware requirement to a single camera and
a single monitor, it supports neither reanimation nor novel-view
synthesis. While portrait relighting approaches [Kim et al. 2024;
Meka et al. 2019, 2020; Pandey et al. 2021; Sun et al. 2019; Tewari
et al. 2020; Wang et al. 2020; Yeh et al. 2022; Zhang et al. 2021]
support relighting in screen space, due to the lack of temporal or 3D
information, they tend to produce flickering when changing view
or expressions. Some approaches [Mei et al. 2024; Tan et al. 2022]
use 3D-aware GANs to synthesize relightable faces, but they have
limited animatability. Another common approach for relighting is
to estimate skin reflectance properties such as albedo, roughness,
and surface normals from multi-view images [Li et al. 2020; Liu et al.
2022] or a single image [Chen et al. 2019; Lattas et al. 2020; Lin et al.
2023; Yamaguchi et al. 2018]. Once estimated, the avatars can be relit
with path tracing or real-time shaders. However, these approaches
are limited to skin regions and non-trivial to unify for the entire
head due to complex scattering/reflectance properties of different
components including hair, eyes, teeth, and skin. Incorporating in-
trinsic decomposition into the image formation process of GANs
also achieves relighting in the wild [Deng et al. 2024; Ranjan et al.
2023]. Optimization-based approaches from a phone scan demon-
strate personalized relightable avatar reconstruction [Bharadwaj
et al. 2023; Wang et al. 2023a; Zheng et al. 2023]. While they show
promising results, fine-grained driving remains challenging and
photorealism under novel illumination is still limited due to the
limited prior knowledge about light transport. Recent neural relight-
ing approaches show remarkable progress in terms of photorealism
SA Conference Papers ’24, December 3–6, 2024, Tokyo, Japan.


4
•
Junxuan Li, Chen Cao, Gabriel Schwartz, Rawal Khirodkar, Christian Richardt, Tomas Simon, Yaser Sheikh, and Shunsuke Saito
[Bi et al. 2021; Saito et al. 2024; Xu et al. 2024; Yang et al. 2023].
MEGANE [Li et al. 2023] learns a relightable appearance model
across multiple identities. URHand [Chen et al. 2024] enables the in-
stant personalization of a pretrained relightable hand prior. VRMM
[Yang et al. 2024] concurrently proposes a multi-identity relightable
avatar model based on MVP [Lombardi et al. 2021] and a linear
lighting model [Yang et al. 2023]. However, it remains a challenge
to faithfully capture geometric details as hair strands using mesh
[Chen et al. 2024] or Mixture of Volumetric Primitives [Li et al. 2023;
Lombardi et al. 2021; Yang et al. 2024]. In this work, we base our
geometric and appearance representation on 3D Gaussians [Kerbl
et al. 2023] and learnable radiance transfer [Saito et al. 2024; Sloan
et al. 2002], respectively. Our approach enables, for the first time,
the learning of a universal relightable prior that natively supports
real-time relighting with global light transport under various illu-
mination. In addition, our approach enables personalization from a
phone capture with unknown illumination.
3
METHOD
As our geometry and appearance representations are based on Re-
lightable Gaussian Codec Avatars [Saito et al. 2024], we first describe
the foundation of 3D Gaussians and learnable radiance transfer. We
then discuss how we extend Gaussian Codec Avatars to build a
universal relightable prior with multi-identity training data. Finally,
we provide the details of our finetuning approach to create a per-
sonalized relightable model from a phone scan using the universal
relightable prior.
3.1
Preliminaries: Relightable 3D Gaussians
Avatars are represented as a collection of 3D Gaussians, denoted as
g𝑘= {t𝑘, q𝑘, s𝑘,𝑜𝑘, c𝑘}. The parameters include a translation vector
t𝑘∈R3, rotation parameterized by a unit quaternion q𝑘∈R4,
scale factors s𝑘∈R3+ along three orthogonal axis, an opacity value
𝑜𝑘∈R+, and a color c𝑘∈R3+. Following 3D Gaussian Splatting
[Kerbl et al. 2023], the Gaussians can be efficiently rendered at high
resolution in real-time.
We base our appearance model on learnable radiance transfer
[Saito et al. 2024]. To model the appearance under different illumina-
tions, precomputed radiance transfer (PRT) [Sloan et al. 2002; Wang
et al. 2009] decomposes the integral of the rendering equation into
the product of extrinsic illumination 𝐿(𝝎) and intrinsic radiance
transfer𝑇(p, 𝝎, 𝝎𝑜). Saito et al. further extend PRT by directly learn-
ing the parameters of the transfer function from multi-view and
multi-light capture data, and decomposing 𝑇(p, 𝝎, 𝝎𝑜) into diffuse
terms (independent of the viewing direction) and specular terms:
c(p, 𝝎𝑜) =
∫
S2 𝐿(𝝎) · 𝑇(p, 𝝎, 𝝎𝑜)𝑑𝝎,
=
∫
S2 𝐿(𝝎) ·

𝑇diffuse(p, 𝝎) +𝑇specular(p, 𝝎, 𝝎𝑜)

𝑑𝝎,
(1)
where c is the outgoing radiance at the position 𝑝along 𝝎𝑜, and
𝐿incoming light. In particular, the outgoing radiance for each
Gaussian c𝑘is decomposed into view-independent diffuse and view-
dependent specular terms, represented as c𝑘= cdiffuse
𝑘
+ cspecular
𝑘
.
The diffuse color is calculated through the integration of the incom-
ing radiance and the intrinsic radiance transfer, both of which are
parameterized by spherical harmonics (SH) [Sloan et al. 2002]:
cdiffuse
𝑘
= 𝝆𝑘⊙
(𝑛+1)2
∑︁
𝑖=1
L𝑖⊙d𝑖
𝑘,
(2)
where L𝑖denotes the 𝑖-th element in 𝑛-th order spherical harmonics
(SH) coefficients of the incident lights, d𝑖
𝑘represents the 𝑖-th ele-
ment in 𝑛-th order SH coefficients of the learnable radiance transfer
function, and 𝝆𝑘is the base albedo color. These terms are modeled
individually for RGB channels. Inspired by Wang et al. [2009], the
specular reflection is represented as spherical Gaussians 𝐺𝑠(𝝎; a, 𝜎)
with the central direction of the lobe a and roughness 𝜎:
cspecular
𝑘
(𝝎𝑜
𝑘) = 𝑣𝑘(𝝎𝑜
𝑘)
∫
S2 L(𝝎)𝐺𝑠(𝝎; a𝑘, 𝜎𝑘)d𝝎,
(3)
a𝑘= 2(𝝎𝑜
𝑘· n𝑘)n𝑘−𝝎𝑜
𝑘.
(4)
Here, 𝑣𝑘(𝝎𝑜
𝑘) ∈(0, 1) is a learnable view-dependent visibility term
that accounts for Fresnel reflection, occlusion, and geometric atten-
uation, 𝝎𝑜
𝑘∈R3 is the viewing direction evaluated at the Gaussian
center, and n𝑘is a view-dependent normal for each Gaussian.
3.2
Universal Relightable Prior Model
Inspired by prior work [Cao et al. 2022], we employ an identity-
conditioned hypernetwork [Ha et al. 2017] to generate person-
specific avatars. In particular, the hypernetwork takes identity fea-
tures as input, and produces a subset of person-specific network
weights for each subject’s avatar decoder. This decoder produces re-
lightable 3D Gaussians corresponding to the input head state (facial
expression, gaze direction, and neck rotation), and input lighting
environment and viewpoint. We show the overview in Fig. 2 (a).
3.2.1
Identity-conditioned Hypernetwork. To allow extraction of
high-frequency person-specific details, our identity encoder Eid
takes identity features in the form of a mean albedo texture map
𝑻mean and a mean geometry map 𝑮mean unwrapped in a 10242 UV
space as input, and produces ‘untied’ bias maps Θidg , Θid
fi , Θid
fv. These
bias maps are injected at various levels of the decoding architecture,
described below. Our hypernetwork also produces an expression-
agnostic opacity {𝑜𝑘}𝑀
𝑘=1 and albedo {𝝆𝑘}𝑀
𝑘=1 for the 3D Gaussians.
Formally, the identity encoder is defined as:
Θid
g , Θid
fi , Θid
fv, {𝑜𝑘, 𝝆𝑘}𝑀
𝑘=1 = Eid(𝑻mean, 𝑮mean; Φid).
(5)
3.2.2
Expression Encoder. We use a variational autoencoder to
model a shared latent distribution of facial expressions across identi-
ties. To avoid the domain shift between studio and phone-captured
textures, our expression encoder Eexp takes only the difference of
geometry maps as input, i.e., Δ𝑮exp = 𝑮exp −𝑮mean, where 𝑮exp
is the current and 𝑮mean is the mean geometry. To preserve subtle
facial expression details when using geometry-only inputs, we use
high-quality tracking (Sec. 3.2.5) to generate these maps. We then
generate a universal expression latent code z ∈R256 as follows:
𝝁, 𝝈= Eexp(Δ𝑮exp; Φexp),
(6)
z = 𝝁+ 𝝈· N (0, 1),
(7)
SA Conference Papers ’24, December 3–6, 2024, Tokyo, Japan.


URAvatar: Universal Relightable Gaussian Codec Avatars
•
5
Expression Data
Mesh
Albedo
Identity Data (Average)
Rendered Avatar
Lights
Down
Down
Down
Up
Up
Up
Down
Down
Down
Up
Up
Up
Up
Up
c
+
+
+
+
c
+
Down
Down
Down
Up
c
ℰ𝑒𝑥𝑝
ℰ𝑖𝑑
T
𝒟
+
+
Up
+
T
Up
Up
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
𝜇, 𝜎
+
Noise
Guide Mesh
View-independent
Neck
Gaze
View
𝑧
View-dependent
Down
Up
T
Conv(4,2)
LeakyReLu
LeakyReLu
Conv(3,1)
TConv(4,2)
1024
512
4
8
8
512
1024
+
+
+
+
T
c
Fig. 3. Network architecture. Our expression encoder, Eexp, takes a 1024x1024 positional map of face geometry as input and encodes it into an expression
latent code with the map size of 4x4. Our downsampling block consists of a convolutional layer with a kernel size of 4 and stride of 2, followed by a leaky
ReLU activation function. Similarly, our upsampling block is composed of a transposed convolutional layer with a kernel size of 4 and stride of 2, followed by
a leaky ReLU activation function. Our identity encoder, Eid, is a U-Net-like architecture that takes the mean texture and geometry of a subject as input,
producing a multi-scale feature pyramid as the ID conditioning data. The produced feature maps are then added to the corresponding layer of the decoder to
produce the guide mesh and its Gaussian parameters. Our decoder consists of 7 upsampling blocks that take a map with a size of 4x4 as input and output
1024x1024 Gaussian parameter maps.
where N (0, 1) is the unit normal distribution. Since the expression
latent code is trained in an end-to-end manner with multi-identity
data, once the model is trained, the same expression code can be
applied to different identities for driving.
3.2.3
Avatar Decoder. Building upon the foundations laid by previ-
ous work [Cao et al. 2022; Li et al. 2017; Lombardi et al. 2021; Saito
et al. 2024], we parameterize and anchor Gaussians on a guide mesh
and model the facial expressions in a canonical space. We further
expand the geometry to encompass the shoulder region and use pre-
defined linear blend skinning to model neck rotations. A geometry
decoder Dg produces the vertices {ˆt𝑘}𝑀
𝑘=1 of this extended guide
mesh:
{ˆt𝑘}𝑀
𝑘=1 = Dg(z, e{𝑙,𝑟}, rn; Θid
g , Φg),
(8)
where z is the expression code, e{𝑙,𝑟} ∈R3 are eye gaze direction
vectors, rn ∈R3 denotes the axis-angle neck rotation relative to the
head, and Θidg is an identity-specific bias from Eq. (5).
We split the appearance model into view-independent and view-
dependent components. Our view-independent face relightable Gauss-
ian decoder, Dfi, takes expression code, gaze vectors, and neck rota-
tion as input. It is further conditioned with the identity ‘untied’ bias
map Θid
fi derived from the identity encoder, resulting in the output
of view-independent attributes for each 3D Gaussian:
{𝛿t𝑘, q𝑘, s𝑘, dc
𝑘, dm
𝑘, 𝜎𝑘}𝑀
𝑘=1 = Dfi(z, e{𝑙,𝑟}, rn; Θid
fi , Φfi).
(9)
Here, dc
𝑘and dm
𝑘are color and monochrome SH coefficients [Saito
et al. 2024], respectively, and 𝜎𝑘is the roughness parameter defined
in Eq. (3). Our view-dependent face relightable Gaussian decoders,
Dfv, incorporates the view direction to the head center, 𝝎𝑜, as
additional input, subsequently generating view-dependent delta
normal and visibility terms for each Gaussian:
{𝛿n𝑘, 𝑣𝑘}𝑀
𝑘=1 = Dfv(z, e{𝑙,𝑟}, rn, 𝝎𝑜; Θid
fv, Φfv).
(10)
Here, Φfi and Φfv represent the learnable parameters of each respec-
tive decoder. The final Gaussian position is a composite of the guide
mesh’s vertex positions, as derived from Eq. (8), and the delta posi-
tion from Eq. (9), taking the form t𝑘= ˆt𝑘+𝛿t𝑘. The view-dependent
surface normal of each Gaussian, n𝑘, is a composition of the mesh
normal, derived from the guided mesh, and the delta normal decoded
from Eq. (10), taking the form n𝑘= ˆn𝑘+ 𝛿n𝑘.
3.2.4
Universal Relightable Explicit Eye Model. We adapt previous
works [Saito et al. 2024; Schwartz et al. 2020] for modeling the eye as
a universal relightable explicit eye model. We use the same network
architecture as the encoder Eid for each identity’s eye encoder Eeye,
SA Conference Papers ’24, December 3–6, 2024, Tokyo, Japan.


6
•
Junxuan Li, Chen Cao, Gabriel Schwartz, Rawal Khirodkar, Christian Richardt, Tomas Simon, Yaser Sheikh, and Shunsuke Saito
defined as below:
Θeye
ei , Θeye
ea = Eeye(𝑻eye, 𝑮eye; Φeye),
(11)
where 𝑻eye and 𝑮eye are the cropped eye regions from the mean tex-
ture and mean geometry maps 𝑻mean and 𝑮mean. The output of this
encoder is the ‘untied’ bias map of each level of the eye’s decoder.
During the phone capture fine-tuning stage, we observed that
the networks were unable to preserve the prior knowledge acquired
during the pre-training stage and failed to reproduce eye glint af-
ter fine-tuning, due to the limited observation of the eye regions
from phone captures. Consequently, we propose a unified specu-
lar visibility decoder Dev, which does not require any conditional
information as input. This design is intended to encourage the net-
work to learn an eye reflection model that can easily generalize to
unseen identities. Therefore, our universal relightable eye decoder
is defined as follows:
{q𝑘, s𝑘,𝑜𝑘, dc
𝑘, dm
𝑘, 𝜎𝑘}𝑀𝑒
𝑘=1 = Dei(e{𝑙,𝑟}; Θeye
ei , Φei),
(12)
{𝝆𝑘}𝑀𝑒
𝑘=1 = Dea(e{𝑙,𝑟}, 𝝎𝑜; Θeye
ea , Φea),
(13)
{𝑣𝑘}𝑀𝑒
𝑘=1 = Dev(e{𝑙,𝑟}, 𝝎𝑜; Φev).
(14)
3.2.5
High-Quality Tracking Geometry. We first track each subject
independently using a high-quality template head mesh. This mesh
is subsequently used to supervise our geometry decoder’s output
ˆt𝑘. We observed that this form of geometry supervision plays a
crucial role in preventing 3D Gaussians from getting trapped in
local minima during the early stages of universal relightable prior
model training. To obtain this tracked mesh, we modify the Pixel
Codec Avatar (PiCA) [Ma et al. 2021] architecture to extend coverage
to the upper body, specifically the head, neck, and shoulders. For
each identity in our training dataset, we therefore fit a personalized
pixel codec avatar using inverse rendering to reconstruct all the
fully-lit, multi-view input images. Subsequently, we extract the
geometry for each frame from PiCA’s geometry branch. Leveraging
the dense position map-based geometry representation and per-
pixel color decoding, we can reconstruct high-quality geometry for
each frame. For monocular phone scans, we follow a pipeline similar
to Cao et al. [2022], but replace the coarse base geometry with the
aforementioned high-resolution template mesh and photometric
refinement [Ma et al. 2021].
3.2.6
Conditioning Albedo Texture Acquisition. We use an off-the-
shelf portrait relighting method [Kim et al. 2024] to estimate the
illumination and the albedo of input images of the face. The esti-
mated illumination is used as an initialization for the environment
light fitting in Sec. 3.3.1. To maximize dataset consistency, we use
the same algorithm to extract albedo in both studio and phone
settings. These albedo images are then unwrapped onto the high-
quality tracked mesh to obtain the mean albedo texture 𝑻mean. This
albedo texture is used as the conditioning input to the identity en-
coder in Eq. (5). During experiments, we found that utilizing this
mean albedo texture, in contrast to a simple color transformation
[Cao et al. 2022], assists in more effectively de-lighting the face
under varying illumination conditions and offers a more consistent
conditional input for our identity encoder.
Optimized environment light
GT environment light
Phone Capture
Before Light Fitting
After Light Fitting
Fig. 4. Visualization of the effect of our fitted environment lights, and the
comparison to the ground-truth environment lights.
3.2.7
Training Losses. Given multi-view video data of a person
illuminated with known point light patterns, we follow previous
works [Kerbl et al. 2023; Saito et al. 2024] to use the same loss
functions to optimize all trainable network parameters Φ with the
following loss function:
L = Lrec + Lreg + 𝜆klLkl,
(15)
where Lrec is the reconstruction loss consists of L1 and SSIM on
rendered images and L2 loss on the high quality tracking geometry,
Lreg is the set of loss functions regularizing the scale of Gaussians,
negative color values, and scale, opacity, and visibility of eye Gaus-
sians. Lkl is the KL-divergence loss on expression code z. Except
the geometry loss, where we use the relative weight of 0.1, we use
the identical relative weights to Saito et al. [2024]. Please refer to
Saito et al. [2024] for the details of each loss function.
3.3
Personalized Avatar from Phone Scan
With the pre-trained universal relightable prior model, we further
fine-tune it using phone capture data to generate a personalized
relightable avatar. During the fine-tuning stage, we initially freeze
the pre-trained encoders and decoder, optimizing the environment
lights to achieve a low reconstruction loss on the face. Subsequently,
we freeze the environment lights and fine-tune the encoders and
decoders for a few iterations to improve the likeness of the captured
subject. See Fig. 2 (b) for an overview. For preprocessing the phone
capture data, we apply the geometry tracking method detailed in
Sec. 3.2.5 and albedo texture acquisition in Sec. 3.2.6 to obtain the
tracked template mesh and its corresponding unwrapped mean
albedo texture for each phone capture.
3.3.1
Fitting Environment Lighting. We parameterize the environ-
ment illumination at the time of phone capture as 𝑁point lights
with position and RGB intensity, {lpos
𝑖
, lint
𝑖}𝑁
𝑖=1. In this paper, we
use 𝑁= 512 distant point lights that we assume to be uniformly
distributed on the sphere. During fine-tuning, we freeze the param-
eters of the encoders and decoders, optimizing only the intensities
{lint
𝑖}𝑁
𝑖=1 of the lights to minimize the L1 loss between the rendered
image 𝐼𝑓and the ground truth ˆ𝐼𝑓in the face region:
Lfit-light =
𝐼𝑓−ˆ𝐼𝑓

1 .
(16)
We show the optimized environment lights of our method in Fig. 4.
Compared to the data captured by the phone, our refined light
accurately reconstructs the primary light source within the space.
SA Conference Papers ’24, December 3–6, 2024, Tokyo, Japan.


URAvatar: Universal Relightable Gaussian Codec Avatars
•
7
Ground Truth
Ours
w/o Unified Spec. Decoder
(a) Comparison on w vs. w/o using unified specular visibility decoder for eyes.
Ground Truth
Ours
w/o HRGeo
(b) Comparison on w vs. w/o using high-resolution tracked mesh (HRGeo).
Fig. 5. Ablation study on unified eye specular visibility decoder and high-resolution tracked mesh.
This adjustment brings the color space of the avatar more in line
with the observed data.
3.3.2
Fine-tuning Encoders and Decoders. After fitting the environ-
ment lights, we freeze them and finetune all the encoder and decoder
parameters Φid, Φexp, Φg, Φfi, Φfv, Φeye, Φei, Φea, and Φev. The loss
function employed during the fine-tuning stage mirrors that utilized
in the pre-training stage, with the inclusion of two additional terms:
Lfinetune = Lrec + Lreg + 𝜆klLkl + Lalpha + Lvgg,
(17)
where the Lalpha represents the alpha loss on the rendered Gaussian
and the input images’ predicted alpha matting. Due to the blurriness
inherent in the phone capture data, we incorporate the VGG loss
[Johnson et al. 2016] between the rendered images and ground truth,
denoted as Lvgg, during the fine-tuning stage to retain more details
from the phone capture.
3.4
Training details
We follow previous work [Cao et al. 2022] and use a network archi-
tecture based on U-Net [Ronneberger et al. 2015] for our identity
encoder. The ID encoder consists of a series of convolutional net-
works that encode the identity conditional data into a set of feature
maps, which are then added to each layer’s output in the decoder.
Please refer to Fig. 3 for networks details.
For the pre-training of the universal relightable prior model, we
use the Adam optimizer [Kingma and Ba 2015] with a learning rate
of 5 × 10−4. We use 64 NVIDIA A100 GPUs with a batch size of
128 for 400k iterations, which takes 5 days to converge. For the
personalized avatar finetuning stage, we set the learning rate as
10−4 and finetune the pre-trained networks using 8 NVIDIA A100
GPUs with a batch size of 16 for 13k iterations, where the first 3k
iterations are for environment light fitting and the last 10k iterations
are for encoder and decoder finetuning. Including the preprocessing
stages, the personalization stage takes approximately 3 hours.
4
EXPERIMENTS
4.1
Datasets
Studio Captures. Our studio capture setup is similar to the cap-
ture system presented by Cao et al. [2022] and Saito et al. [2024],
where we obtain calibrated and synchronized multi-view images at
a resolution of 4,096×2,668 pixels through the use of 110 cameras
and 460 white LED lights operating at 90 Hz. Participants are in-
structed to perform a predetermined set of various facial expressions,
sentences, and gaze motions for approximately 144,000 frames. To
observe diverse illumination patterns while maintaining stable facial
tracking, we employ time-multiplexed illumination [Bi et al. 2020].
Specifically, full-on illumination is interleaved every third frame to
facilitate tracking, while the remaining frames utilize either grouped
or randomly selected sets of 5 lights. In total, this capture script was
used to record data from 345 participants. Of these, 342 were used
to train our universal relightable model, while the remaining three
were reserved for evaluation.
Phone Captures. We captured 10 people under five alternating
illumination conditions via mobile phone. Each video duration is
5–10 minutes per subject. Participants performed a series of actions,
including head rotations, changing eye gaze, making various facial
expressions, and regular daily speech. They were captured in an
LED wall cylinder with a diameter of 4.7 m and a height of 3 m.
The LED panels have a maximum brightness exceeding 1,500 cd/m2
and a pixel pitch of 2.84 mm to realistically light the participants
under multiple real-world lighting environments. To estimate the
ground-truth environment map for each lighting condition, we first
geometrically calibrate the pose of all LED panels, so that we can ray-
trace environment maps at arbitrary positions in the capture volume,
including the head’s center of mass. Additionally, we characterize
the LED panels’ response using a Ricoh Theta Z1 360° camera placed
at the center of the capture volume, such that we can predict how
SA Conference Papers ’24, December 3–6, 2024, Tokyo, Japan.


8
•
Junxuan Li, Chen Cao, Gabriel Schwartz, Rawal Khirodkar, Christian Richardt, Tomas Simon, Yaser Sheikh, and Shunsuke Saito
Input Capture
Ours
FLARE
Ground-Truth
Fig. 6. Qualitative comparison of environment relighting between FLARE
[Bharadwaj et al. 2023] and our approach in an unseen test environment.
Table 1. Comparison of environment relighting for Phone captured identi-
ties.
Method
MAE ↓
MSE ↓
SSIM ↑
LPIPS ↓
FLARE
0.0327
0.0068
0.8849
0.1722
Ours
0.0136
0.0025
0.9524
0.0605
a particular displayed lighting environment affects a participant
in terms of incident illumination. For this, we display a ramp of
red, green, blue and white lighting environments, one at a time,
e.g. from 0% red (black) to 100% red, and capture a linear HDR
image for each condition using a five-photo exposure bracket of
raw images. The capture with white LED light is used only for
validation. We further optimize a learnable per-camera 3×3 color
correction matrix to account for differences in color spaces between
cameras. For evaluation, we select one environment as input to
build a personalized avatar for each subject. Note that we do not
use the ground-truth illumination for our avatar reconstruction.
We then relight the reconstructed avatar in other environments,
and compare our rendered avatar with the ground-truth data. We
randomly select 100 frames to cover sufficient variation of head
rotation and expressions.
4.2
Comparisons
In Tab. 1, we show the quantitative evaluation of our method com-
pared to FLARE, the current state-of-the-art relightable avatar re-
construction method from a phone scan [Bharadwaj et al. 2023].
We report mean-absolute-error (MAE), mean-squared-error (MSE),
SSIM and LPIPS as the metrics for the face region. Unlike our ap-
proach, FLARE uses meshes as a shape representation and a para-
metric BRDF model (i.e., Lambertian for diffuse, and Cook and Tor-
rance [1982] for specular) with only the first bounce considered.
With Albedo (uv)
Without Albedo (uv)
Relighting with single point light
Relighting with environment light
Input Capture
Fig. 7. Comparison of w/ vs. w/o using albedo conditioning data.
Our approach achieves significantly lower error, and the qualita-
tive comparison in Fig. 6 further confirms the substantial quality
improvement. This illustrates the efficacy of our geometry and ap-
pearance representation as well as our universal relightable prior
model.
4.3
Evaluation
We evaluate our key design choice of using albedo as an identity
feature instead of a simple color-transformed mean texture [Cao
et al. 2022]. Figure 7 shows that illumination-agnostic albedo greatly
reduces artifacts in the zero-shot reconstruction case. In contrast,
the simple color transformation leads to more “baked-in” artifacts
in the reconstructed avatar. We also conducted an ablation study on
the unified eye specular visibility decoder, and the results are shown
in Fig. 5a. While the baseline model loses glints due to overfitting
to inaccurate ground-truth gaze, our unified decoder faithfully pre-
serve eye glints. Furthermore, Fig. 5b illustrates the efficacy of the
proposed high-resolution tracked mesh over a coarse mesh tracking
used in prior work [Cao et al. 2022; Saito et al. 2024] on a novel
identity. We also show additional qualitative results in Fig. 8. This
shows that our approach generalizes to a wide range of identities,
illuminations, and expressions.
5
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
The relighting quality of our work could be degraded in several
cases. Our model relies on the universal prior learned from studio-
captured data, and variations not covered by the training corpus
may lead to suboptimal generalization. For example, as the captured
subjects in the training data all wear gray T-shirts, the relighting of
clothing is less accurate than for the head area (see the bottom row
in Fig. 6). Also, while our light estimation is robust, any inaccuracy
in the light estimation leads to ‘baked-in’ artifacts. In particular,
estimating high-frequency illumination remains a challenge, which
mainly affects the quality of eye relighting. Future work could ad-
dress this by incorporating a strong illumination prior [Gardner et al.
SA Conference Papers ’24, December 3–6, 2024, Tokyo, Japan.


URAvatar: Universal Relightable Gaussian Codec Avatars
•
9
Input Images
Fig. 8. Relighting results on multiple identities with different expressions.
SA Conference Papers ’24, December 3–6, 2024, Tokyo, Japan.


10
•
Junxuan Li, Chen Cao, Gabriel Schwartz, Rawal Khirodkar, Christian Richardt, Tomas Simon, Yaser Sheikh, and Shunsuke Saito
2022; Lyu et al. 2023]. Last but not least, the current personalization
process requires multiple preprocessing steps and test-time finetun-
ing, and is hence not instant. Enabling instant personalization with
full relighting capability remains exciting future work.
We presented URAvatar, a novel framework to create photoreal-
istic relightable head avatars driven by gaze, neck rotation, and a
latent facial expression code in real-time, with faithful diffuse scat-
tering and specular highlights. Our experiments show that building
a strong generalizable prior of global light transport for dynamic
facial expressions from multi-identity studio data is now possible
with a sufficiently expressive geometric representation (3D Gaus-
sians) and appearance representation (learnable radiance transfer).
We also evaluated the fidelity of our reconstruction on unseen nat-
ural illuminations by building a new virtual environment capture
system consisting of LED display panels, and showed the efficacy of
our method compared to prior works. Our work, for the first time,
enables the faithful reconstruction of relightable avatars with global
light transport from a single phone scan, unlocking the possibility
of virtual teleportation with authentic avatars as a communication
tool.
REFERENCES
ShahRukh Athar, Zhixin Shu, and Dimitris Samaras. 2023. FLAME-in-NeRF: Neural
control of radiance fields for free view face animation. In International Conference
on Automatic Face and Gesture Recognition (FG).
ShahRukh Athar, Zexiang Xu, Kalyan Sunkavalli, Eli Shechtman, and Zhixin Shu. 2022.
RigNeRF: Fully controllable neural 3D portraits. In Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition (CVPR). 20364–20373.
Pascal Bérard, Derek Bradley, Maurizio Nitti, Thabo Beeler, and Markus H Gross. 2014.
High-quality capture of eyes. Transactions on Graphics (TOG) 33, 6 (2014), 223:1–12.
Shrisha Bharadwaj, Yufeng Zheng, Otmar Hilliges, Michael J. Black, and Victoria Fer-
nandez Abrevaya. 2023. FLARE: Fast learning of Animatable and Relightable Mesh
Avatars. Transactions on Graphics (TOG) 42, 6 (2023), 204:1–15.
Sai Bi, Stephen Lombardi, Shunsuke Saito, Tomas Simon, Shih-En Wei, Kevyn Mcphail,
Ravi Ramamoorthi, Yaser Sheikh, and Jason Saragih. 2021. Deep relightable ap-
pearance models for animatable faces. Transactions on Graphics (TOG) 40, 4 (2021),
89:1–15.
Sai Bi, Zexiang Xu, Kalyan Sunkavalli, Miloš Hašan, Yannick Hold-Geoffroy, David
Kriegman, and Ravi Ramamoorthi. 2020. Deep reflectance volumes: Relightable
reconstructions from multi-view photometric images. In European Conference on
Computer Vision (ECCV). 294–311.
Volker Blanz and Thomas Vetter. 2023. A morphable model for the synthesis of 3D
faces. In Seminal Graphics Papers: Pushing the Boundaries, Volume 2. 157–164.
Chen Cao, Tomas Simon, Jin Kyu Kim, Gabe Schwartz, Michael Zollhoefer, Shun-Suke
Saito, Stephen Lombardi, Shih-En Wei, Danielle Belko, Shoou-I Yu, Yaser Sheikh, and
Jason Saragih. 2022. Authentic volumetric avatars from a phone scan. Transactions
on Graphics (TOG) 41, 4 (2022), 163:1–19.
Chen Cao, Yanlin Weng, Shun Zhou, Yiying Tong, and Kun Zhou. 2013. Faceware-
House: A 3D facial expression database for visual computing. IEEE Transactions on
Visualization and Computer Graphics 20, 3 (2013), 413–425.
Chen Cao, Hongzhi Wu, Yanlin Weng, Tianjia Shao, and Kun Zhou. 2016. Real-time
facial animation with image-based dynamic avatars. Transactions on Graphics (TOG)
35, 4 (2016), 126:1–12.
Anpei Chen, Zhang Chen, Guli Zhang, Kenny Mitchell, and Jingyi Yu. 2019. Photo-
realistic facial details synthesis from single image. In International Conference on
Computer Vision (ICCV). 9429–9439.
Zhaoxi Chen, Gyeongsik Moon, Kaiwen Guo, Chen Cao, Stanislav Pidhorskyi, Tomas
Simon, Rohan Joshi, Yuan Dong, Yichen Xu, Bernardo Pires, He Wen, Lucas Evans,
Bo Peng, Julia Buffalini, Autumn Trimble, Kevyn McPhail, Melissa Schoeller, Shoou-I
Yu, Javier Romero, Michael Zollhöfer, Yaser Sheikh, Ziwei Liu, and Shunsuke Saito.
2024. URHand: Universal Relightable Hands. In Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition (CVPR).
Robert L Cook and Kenneth E. Torrance. 1982. A reflectance model for computer
graphics. Transactions on Graphics (TOG) 1, 1 (1982), 7–24.
Paul Debevec, Tim Hawkins, Chris Tchou, Haarm-Pieter Duiker, Westley Sarokin, and
Mark Sagar. 2000. Acquiring the reflectance field of a human face. In SIGGRAPH.
145–156.
Boyang Deng, Yifan Wang, and Gordon Wetzstein. 2024. LumiGAN: Unconditional
Generation of Relightable 3D Human Faces. In International Conference on 3D Vision
(3DV). 302–312.
Jose I Echevarria, Derek Bradley, Diego Gutierrez, and Thabo Beeler. 2014. Capturing
and stylizing hair for 3D fabrication. Transactions on Graphics (TOG) 33, 4 (2014),
125:1–11.
E Friesen and Paul Ekman. 1978. Facial action coding system: a technique for the
measurement of facial movement. Palo Alto 3, 2 (1978), 5.
Graham Fyffe, Paul Graham, Borom Tunwattanapong, Abhijeet Ghosh, and Paul De-
bevec. 2016. Near-Instant Capture of High-Resolution Facial Geometry and Re-
flectance. In Computer Graphics Forum, Vol. 35. 353–363.
Guy Gafni, Justus Thies, Michael Zollhofer, and Matthias Nießner. 2021. Dynamic
neural radiance fields for monocular 4D facial avatar reconstruction. In Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR). 8649–8658.
James Gardner, Bernhard Egger, and William Smith. 2022. Rotation-equivariant condi-
tional spherical neural fields for learning a natural illumination prior. Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems 35 (2022), 26309–26323.
Abhijeet Ghosh, Graham Fyffe, Borom Tunwattanapong, Jay Busch, Xueming Yu, and
Paul Debevec. 2011. Multiview face capture using polarized spherical gradient
illumination. Transactions on Graphics (TOG) 30, 6 (2011), 129:1–10.
Philip-William Grassal, Malte Prinzler, Titus Leistner, Carsten Rother, Matthias Nießner,
and Justus Thies. 2022. Neural head avatars from monocular RGB videos. In Confer-
ence on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR). 18653–18664.
David Ha, Andrew Dai, and Quoc V Le. 2017. Hypernetworks. In International Confer-
ence on Learning Representations (ICLR).
Liwen Hu, Shunsuke Saito, Lingyu Wei, Koki Nagano, Jaewoo Seo, Jens Fursund, Iman
Sadeghi, Carrie Sun, Yen-Chun Chen, and Hao Li. 2017. Avatar digitization from a
single image for real-time rendering. Transactions on Graphics (TOG) 36, 6 (2017),
195:1–14.
Alexandru Eugen Ichim, Sofien Bouaziz, and Mark Pauly. 2015. Dynamic 3D avatar
creation from hand-held video input. Transactions on Graphics (TOG) 34, 4 (2015),
45:1–14.
Justin Johnson, Alexandre Alahi, and Li Fei-Fei. 2016. Perceptual losses for real-time
style transfer and super-resolution. In European Conference on Computer Vision
(ECCV). 694–711.
Bernhard Kerbl, Georgios Kopanas, Thomas Leimkühler, and George Drettakis. 2023. 3D
Gaussian splatting for real-time radiance field rendering. Transactions on Graphics
(TOG) 42, 4 (2023), 139:1–14.
Hoon Kim, Minje Jang, Wonjun Yoon, Jisoo Lee, Donghyun Na, and Sanghyun Woo.
2024. SwitchLight: Co-design of Physics-driven Architecture and Pre-training
Framework for Human Portrait Relighting. In Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition (CVPR).
Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. 2015. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization.
In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR).
Alexandros Lattas, Stylianos Moschoglou, Baris Gecer, Stylianos Ploumpis, Vasileios
Triantafyllou, Abhijeet Ghosh, and Stefanos Zafeiriou. 2020. AvatarMe: Realistically
Renderable 3D Facial Reconstruction “in-the-wild”. In Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition (CVPR). 760–769.
Alexandros Lattas, Stylianos Moschoglou, Stylianos Ploumpis, Baris Gecer, Abhijeet
Ghosh, and Stefanos Zafeiriou. 2021. AvatarMe++: Facial shape and BRDF inference
with photorealistic rendering-aware GANs. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis
and Machine Intelligence 44, 12 (2021), 9269–9284.
John P Lewis, Ken Anjyo, Taehyun Rhee, Mengjie Zhang, Frederic H Pighin, and
Zhigang Deng. 2014. Practice and theory of blendshape facial models. Eurographics
State-of-the-Art Reports 1, 8 (2014), 2.
Gengyan Li, Abhimitra Meka, Franziska Mueller, Marcel C Buehler, Otmar Hilliges, and
Thabo Beeler. 2022. EyeNeRF: a hybrid representation for photorealistic synthesis,
animation and relighting of human eyes. Transactions on Graphics (TOG) 41, 4 (2022),
166:1–16.
Hao Li, Jihun Yu, Yuting Ye, and Chris Bregler. 2013. Realtime facial animation with
on-the-fly correctives. Transactions on Graphics (TOG) 32, 4 (2013), 42:1–10.
Junxuan Li, Shunsuke Saito, Tomas Simon, Stephen Lombardi, Hongdong Li, and Jason
Saragih. 2023. MEGANE: Morphable Eyeglass and Avatar Network. In Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR). 12769–12779.
Ruilong Li, Kalle Bladin, Yajie Zhao, Chinmay Chinara, Owen Ingraham, Pengda Xiang,
Xinglei Ren, Pratusha Bhuvana Prasad, Bipin Kishore, Jun Xing, and Hao Li. 2020.
Learning Formation of Physically-Based Face Attributes. In Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR). 3407–3416.
Tianye Li, Timo Bolkart, Michael J Black, Hao Li, and Javier Romero. 2017. Learning
a model of facial shape and expression from 4D scans. Transactions on Graphics
(TOG) 36, 6 (2017), 194:1–17.
Connor Lin, Koki Nagano, Jan Kautz, Eric Chan, Umar Iqbal, Leonidas Guibas, Gordon
Wetzstein, and Sameh Khamis. 2023. Single-shot implicit morphable faces with
consistent texture parameterization. In SIGGRAPH Conference Proceedings. 83:1–12.
Shichen Liu, Yunxuan Cai, Haiwei Chen, Yichao Zhou, and Yajie Zhao. 2022. Rapid
Face Asset Acquisition with Recurrent Feature Alignment. Transactions on Graphics
SA Conference Papers ’24, December 3–6, 2024, Tokyo, Japan.
