Title: GarmentDreamer: 3DGS Guided Garment Synthesis with Diverse Geometry and Texture Details

GarmentDreamer: 3DGS Guided Garment Synthesis with Diverse
Geometry and Texture Details
BOQIAN LI1,2∗, XUAN LI1∗, YING JIANG1,3∗, TIANYI XIE1, FENG GAO4, HUAMIN WANG5, YIN YANG2,
and CHENFANFU JIANG1
a blue denim
sleeveless tee
a blue denim skirt
an Ironman
upperbody armor
a silver metal
armored trousers
a traditional royal style
dress made of blue silk
an American Western
cowboy style jumpsuit 
made of orange leather
Fig. 1. GarmentDreamer is a garment synthesis framework for customizing simulation-ready high-quality textured garment meshes from text prompts.
Traditional 3D garment creation is labor-intensive, involving sketching,
modeling, UV mapping, and texturing, which are time-consuming and costly.
Recent advances in diffusion-based generative models have enabled new
possibilities for 3D garment generation from text prompts, images, and
videos. However, existing methods either suffer from inconsistencies among
multi-view images or require additional processes to separate cloth from
the underlying human model. In this paper, we propose GarmentDreamer, a
novel method that leverages 3D Gaussian Splatting (GS) as guidance to gen-
erate wearable, simulation-ready 3D garment meshes from text prompts. In
contrast to using multi-view images directly predicted by generative models
as guidance, our 3DGS guidance ensures consistent optimization in both
garment deformation and texture synthesis. Our method introduces a novel
garment augmentation module, guided by normal and RGBA information,
and employs implicit Neural Texture Fields (NeTF) combined with Varia-
tional Score Distillation (VSD) to generate diverse geometric and texture
details. We validate the effectiveness of our approach through comprehensive
qualitative and quantitative experiments, showcasing the superior perfor-
mance of GarmentDreamer over state-of-the-art alternatives. Our project
page is available at https://xuan-li.github.io/GarmentDreamerDemo/.
1
INTRODUCTION
The creation of 3D digital garments is crucial in graphics and vision,
driven by their extensive applications in fashion design, virtual try-
on, gaming, animation, virtual reality, and robotics. Nevertheless,
the conventional pipeline for 3D garment creation which encom-
passes sketching and modeling, followed by UV mapping, texturing,
* indicates equal contributions.
Affiliations: 1UCLA, 2Utah, 3HKU, 4Amazon (This work is not related to F. Gao’s
position at Amazon.), 5Style3D Research
shading and simulation using commercial software [11, 36, 54] de-
mands substantial manual effort. This process results in significant
time and labor costs.
With the advancement of diffusion-based generative models [34,
42], 3D garment generation from text and images has flourished.
Two primary methods have emerged. The first method, as explored
in prior works [16, 33], starts by reconstructing 2D sewing patterns
and subsequently generating 3D garments from these patterns. The
second method involves generative models that directly predict the
distribution of 3D target shapes based on image and text inputs,
without relying on 2D sewing patterns [47, 53, 56, 67]. However, the
former approach necessitates a vast amount of paired training data
between sewing patterns and corresponding text or images [33].
The latter approach, while simpler, encounters issues such as multi-
view inconsistency [47] and a lack of high-fidelity details, which
often require additional post-processing for downstream simulation
tasks [25, 29, 30, 66]. Thus, generating simulation-ready, textured
garments with high-fidelity details remains challenging.
Recognizing the advantages and limitations of both traditional
pipeline and modern generative models, our goal is to create high-
fidelity, simulation-ready textured garments with appropriately
placed openings for the head, arms, and legs. We aim to achieve
details comparable to that of the traditional pipeline. In this paper,
we focus on full-piece garment generation without relying on 2D
sewing patterns, which is sufficient for many graphics applications.
To achieve our goals, we leverage image/text-conditioned diffu-
sion models. Several challenges revealed by prior methods must be
addressed: (1) Many avatar generators [20, 31, 63] directly produce
fused cloth-human models with watertight meshes. They require
separation from humans and complex modifications to introduce
arXiv:2405.12420v1  [cs.CV]  20 May 2024


2
•
Boqian Li, et al.
openings for the head, arms, and legs for downstream tasks. (2)
While some high-quality non-watertight garments are generated
by deforming template meshes guided by multi-view images [47],
predicting unsigned distance fields (UDF) via diffusion models [67],
or optimizing meshes through differentiable simulators [30], these
approaches often lack detailed and realistic geometrical features
or complex textures. This limitation stems from the inherent chal-
lenges in 3D shape diffusion. (3) Deforming garment geometry solely
based on multi-view images predicted by diffusion models can lead
to inconsistency [8]. Additionally, refining textures in UV space can
result in over-saturated, blocky artifacts [5, 56].
To address these challenges, we introduce GarmentDreamer, a
3DGS [22] guided garment synthesis method for simulation-ready,
non-watertight garments featuring diverse geometry and intricate
textures. We first leverage diffusion models and physical simulations
to obtain a smooth garment template and generate corresponding
Gaussian kernels via Score Distillation Sampling (SDS) loss [56].
Subsequently, we exploit the estimated normal map and RGBA in-
formation from 3DGS as guidance in our garment augmentation
module to deform meshes using a coarse-to-fine optimization ap-
proach. In the coarse stage, we refine garment contour together
with neck, arm, waist, and leg openings, and then in the fine stage,
multi-scale details are created under the proposed guidance. Com-
pared with guidance from generated multi-view images, multi-view
consistent guidance extracted by Gaussian kernels creates more
high-quality geometry and texture details. An implicit Neural Tex-
ture Field (NeTF) is then reconstructed and subsequently augmented
by Variational Score Distillation (VSD) loss to offer high-quality gar-
ment textures. Compared with baking Gaussian kernels into a UV
map directly, our texture extraction strategy offers more consistent
results. Our contributions include:
• We introduce a novel 3D garment synthesis method using dif-
fusion models with 3DGS as a reference to generate simulation-
ready garments from text prompts.
• We propose a new garment deformer module using normal-based
and RGBA-based guidance in course-to-fine garment mesh re-
finement stages to generate diverse, high-quality garments with
complex geometrical details.
• We show implicit Neural Texture Fields (NeTF) can be recon-
structed and be fine tuned by VSD loss to generate high-quality
garment textures.
• We conduct comprehensive qualitative and quantitative experi-
ments to evaluate the superior performance of GarmentDreamer
as compared to prior methods.
2
RELATED WORK
Our work focuses on generating realistic and diverse wearable
simulation-ready 3D garment meshes from text prompts.
Diffusion-based 3D Generation. For 3D generation, many work
distill 2D pre-trained diffusion models via SDS loss [42, 71] and
Variational Score Distillation (VSD) [60, 69], or exploit 3D diffusion
models to directly generate 3D representations such as point cloud
[35], Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) [18, 51], mesh [34, 43], SDF
[10, 50], Unsigned Distance Field (UDF) [67], DMTets [48], and
3DGaussian Splatting (GS) [56, 64]. To capture rich surface details
and high-fidelity geometry of generated 3D shapes, normal maps
[20, 28, 32, 34], depth maps [44], pose priors [68], skinned shape
priors [23] have been adopted as guidance modules for 3D digital
avatar [21, 30, 63], garment [16, 47], and scene synthesis tasks [26,
55, 57].
3D Garment Synthesis. Traditional 3D garment creation usually
begins with 2D sewing patterns in commercial fashion design soft-
ware, necessitating significant labor and time costs [47]. To auto-
mate 3D garment generation, learning-based methods have been
employed to infer garment shapes from text prompts, images, and
videos [4, 6, 12, 16, 17, 30, 33, 47, 49, 53, 62, 67, 70]. However, many
methods focused on clothed human synthesis [6, 19, 58, 62, 70] typ-
ically generate garments fused together with digital human models,
which restricts them to basic skinning-based animations and re-
quires nontrivial work to separate the garments from the human
body. In contrast, our work focuses on separately wearable geome-
try. Other closely related work include [30] which also generates
high-quality simulation-ready clothes at the expense of creating
clothing templates by artists and precise point clouds by scanners.
Some recent methods [16, 33] generate non-watertight garments
with sewing patterns, while ours generates a one-piece cloth simi-
larly to Sarafianos et al. [47]. Although one-piece 3D clothing is not
suitable for manufacturing, it is still sufficient for many graphics
downstream tasks. Note that [47] develops methods to improve
multi-view consistency in image generation similarly to [34], while
our method mitigates this challenge through a novel 3DGS guidance.
Garment Refinement. Garment refinement involves diversification
[23], draping [12], wrinkle generation [7, 38], stylization [47] and
other techniques to enhance diversity and realism. Traditional meth-
ods optimize energy or geometric constraints to directly edit meshes
[3, 52]. Recent learning-based approaches modify latent geometry
and textures, potentially with conditioned diffusion [12, 16, 23, 53],
and decode latent features to generate refined meshes. To modify
garment meshes from text prompts, Textdeformer [14] represents
mesh deformation through Jacobians and exploits global CLIP fea-
tures as guidance. Garment3DGen [47] deforms garment geometry
using 2D image guidance. However, these RGB-based or CLIP-based
methods have a tendency to prefer modifying 2D textures over 3D
geometric structures. On the other hand, Surf-D [67] edits garment
geometry with sketch conditions but lacks texture synthesis. Kim
et al. [23] utilize normal maps as references to carve clothed hu-
mans. Worchel et al. [61] exploit neural deferred shading results
to modify mesh surfaces. Inspired by these works [23, 61], our ap-
proach explores both normal maps and RGBA image features with
neural deferred shading to guide mesh deformation, creating realis-
tic garment geometry and textures that can be directly applied to
downstream simulation and animation tasks.
3
METHOD
Fig. 2 overviews our method. Given text T, GarmentDreamer gen-
erates wearable textured garment meshes F𝑔with neck, arm, waist,
and leg openings. Starting with T, we first generate garment tem-
plate F𝑡based on predicted UDFs in § 3.1. Then we optimize a 3DGS
representation in § 3.2 based on T and F𝑡. Leveraging 3DGS guid-
ance, we design a two-stage training in § 3.3 to refine F𝑡into the


GarmentDreamer: 3DGS Guided Garment Synthesis with Diverse Geometry and Texture Details
•
3
2D Diﬀusion
Fiing
Simulation
GS
Render
SDS
Mesh Diﬀusion
Model
an Ironman 
upperbody armor
2D Diﬀusion
Implicit Texture Field
VSD
Diﬀerentiable
Rasterizer
Diﬀerentiable
Rasterizer
coarse stage
ﬁne stage
Gaussian 
Splaing
an Ironman 
upperbody armor
Baking 
Texture
Fig. 2. Starting with text prompts, we generate a garment template mesh using a diffusion model. We then optimize a 3DGS from the template and text.
Using RGBA, normal maps, and masks, we guide a two-stage deformation to refine the mesh into the final shape. Finally, we reconstruct and optimize an
implicit texture field via VSD, producing high-quality textured garment meshes that can be applied to downstream simulation/animation tasks.
final garment shape F𝑔. Finally, we generate high-quality textures
by optimizing an implicit Neural Texture Field (NeTF) Φ augmented
with variational SDS loss in § 3.4.
3.1
Garment Template Mesh Generation
Human clothing generation can utilize strong inductive biases, as
garments within the same category tend to have similar topology
and overall orientation. Thus, it is reasonable to warm-start our
optimization using a template and modify it. The starting point is
to generate a template mesh F𝑡from text T. We use the meshes
from Cloth3D [1] and SewFactory [33] as our dataset to train a mesh
diffusion model. Leveraging the efficiency and effectiveness of gen-
eration in latent space [46], we represent the geometry information
of the garment mesh in a compact vector form by extracting its
latent code.
Simulation-based Preprocessing. A straightforward approach to
obtaining the garment latent space is to train an autoencoder with
high-quality garment meshes [67]. However, through experiments,
we found that the autoencoder struggles to capture high-frequency
geometric details, such as overly dense wrinkles. Additionally, some
meshes in the dataset exhibit self-intersections due to these noisy
details, resulting in unsatisfactory reconstruction. We believe these
high-frequency details are not only challenging for the autoencoder
to learn but also redundant for the purpose of template generation.
Recognizing that we only need a warm-start template and will
obtain geometric details in later phases, we propose a simulation-
based data preprocessing step that involves smoothing the garment
meshes using a physics-based cloth simulator. Specifically, we set
the rest bending angle between every two adjacent triangles to zero.
By minimizing the bending energy in quasi-static Finite Element
Method (FEM) simulation steps [27] together with a Neo-Hookean
stretching energy, each garment mesh transforms to a rest state
with minimal high-frequency wrinkles, without altering the overall
characteristic shape.
Garment Latent Space. To encode the 3D garment template meshes
F𝑡into latent space, we utilize the Dynamic Graph CNN (DGCNN)
[59], producing a 64-dimensional garment latent code 𝛾. To recon-
struct the garment geometry from the latent code, we employ a
Multilayer Perceptron (MLP) with Conditional Batch Normalization
[13] as the decoder. This decoder processes the latent code alongside
a set of query points, which are sampled from the input meshes
and their surroundings during training, and randomly sampled in a
canonicalized space during testing. The decoder then predicts the
UDF values for these points. We use both distance loss and gradient
loss as suggested by De Luigi et al. [12] in training the autoencoder.
Latent Diffusion. Building upon the garment latent space, we train
a latent diffusion model to predict the latent code 𝛾conditioned
on the garment category specified in the text prompt T, such as
a skirt or T-shirt. Using the garment decoder alongside a set of
query points, we obtain the garment UDF field. Finally, the desired
garment template mesh F𝑡is extracted from the predicted UDF
using MeshUDF [15].
3.2
3D Gaussian Generation
Given a generated template mesh that is smooth and relatively
generic, our next step is to generate proper guidance models to
enhance it with details. While prior work has utilized multi-view
image generators, they suffer from risks of inconsistency [8]. We
turn to 3D radiance field representations to completely mitigate
potential multi-view inconsistency risks.
To this end we adopt 3DGS [22], which exploits 3D anisotropic
Gaussian kernels to reconstruct 3D scenes with learnable mean 𝜇,
opacity 𝜎, covariance Σ, and spherical harmonic coefficients S. We
utilize the garment template mesh F𝑡with the same text prompt
T offering color, material, and pattern descriptions to generate
3D Gaussian kernels for further guiding geometry refinement and
texture generation. Similar to the query points used in the garment
latent code decoder, the initial 3D Gaussians are randomly sampled


4
•
Boqian Li, et al.
at the surroundings of the template mesh surface. Following Yi
et al. [64], we optimize Gaussian kernels using SDS loss [42] with
a frozen 2D diffusion model 𝜙conditioning on text prompts T.
The rendered image is produced by a differentiable renderer 𝑔with
the parameters of 3DGS 𝜃, notated as x = 𝑔(𝜃). The formula for
computing the gradient to guide the updating direction of 𝜃is:
∇𝜃LSDS(𝜙, x = 𝑔(𝜃)) ≜E𝑡,𝜖
h
𝑤(𝑡)

ˆ𝜖𝜙(z𝑡; T,𝑡) −𝜖

𝜕x
𝜕𝜃
i
, where
ˆ𝜖𝜙(z𝑡; T,𝑡) is the score estimation function, predicting the sampled
noise ˆ𝜖given the noisy image z𝑡, text prompt T, and noise level 𝑡;
𝑤(𝑡) is a weighting function.
To render a view, the 3D Gaussian kernels are projected to 2D
screen space based on their 𝑧-depth. Each pixel color 𝐶𝑝is com-
puted by 𝛼-blending these 2D Gaussians from near to far: 𝐶𝑝=
Í
𝑖∈𝑁𝑝𝑖𝛼𝑖
Î𝑖−1
𝑗=1(1 −𝛼𝑗), where 𝑝𝑖is the evaluated color by spheri-
cal harmonics viewed from the camera to the kernel’s mean; 𝛼𝑖is
the product of the kernel’s opacity and 2D Gaussian weight eval-
uated at the pixel coordinate. We render RGB images and masks
of Gaussian kernels from 24 views for the next stage. The masks
are generated using a step function with an empirical threshold 𝜗
applied to the opacity 𝜎∈[0, 1] of each Gaussian kernel.
3.3
Garment Geometry Deformer
We propose a two-stage training process to optimize the geometry
of a garment to match the multi-view guidance generated from
3DGS. The first coarse stage utilizes masks to optimize the contour
of the garment’s geometry. The second fine stage employs RGB
renderings and normal maps to enrich local details. Additionally,
we use the mesh generated in the coarse stage to detect hole regions
and maintain garment openings for wearability.
3.3.1
Coarse Stage. Given the template mesh F𝑡and a camera view
𝐶𝑖, we use a differentiable rasterizer to generate the current mask.
We use the following mask loss to guide the contour optimization:
LM(𝒗) =
1
|I|
∑︁
𝑖∈I
MSE(𝑅𝑀(F𝑡,𝐶𝑖), 𝑀𝑖),
(1)
where the optimization variable 𝒗is the concatenation of all vertex
positions, I is the set of camera views, 𝑅𝑀is the differentiable
contour rasterizer empowered by Nvdiffrast [24], and {𝑀𝑖} is the
ground truth mask guidance.
Optimization under merely LM is stochastic and unstable. One
reason is that the vertices inside the masks can move freely without
changing the output mask. Considering that the template mesh is
smooth, we can maintain the smooth surface and stabilize the defor-
mation process during the coarse stage by imposing constraints on
the surface curvature. This is achieved through a normal-consistency
loss LNC and a Laplacian loss LL as in Worchel et al. [61]:
LNC(𝒗) = 1
𝑁
∑︁
𝑗∼𝑘
(1 −𝒏𝑗· 𝒏𝑘)2, LL(𝒗) = 1
𝑀
∑︁
𝑗∼𝑘
𝑤𝑗𝑘∥𝒗𝑗−𝒗𝑘∥2, (2)
where 𝒏𝑖, 𝒏𝑗are adjacent face normals, 𝑁is the number of adjacent
face pairs, 𝒗𝑖, 𝒗𝑗are adjacent vertex positions, 𝑀is the number of
adjacent vertex pairs, and {𝑤𝑗𝑘} are the Laplacian edge weights.
In summary, the loss function for the coarse stage is the weighted
sum of these losses. During our implementation, we found that
without any additional constraints to be applied other than the
aforementioned losses, hole regions can be preserved during the
deformation process and follow the deformation of the mesh sur-
face. Furthermore, the boundaries of the hole regions coincide with
the boundaries of the garment rendered by Gaussian rendering.
This provides us with good intermediate results. By utilizing the
deformed hole regions, we can continue to preserve the openings
and the garment’s wearability in the next deformation stage.
3.3.2
Fine Stage. While contour mask guidance can optimize the
garment mesh to match the overall shape of the generated 3DGS, it
does not encourage the generation of local geometric details char-
acterized by local displacement variations, which are invisible to
masks. On the other hand, RGB renderings do not provide sufficient
geometric information since shading effects can be baked into tex-
tures without changing the geometry. This is also a limitation of
3DGS, where the geometric distribution of Gaussian kernels may
not align with the actual objects.
However, the RGB renderings of 3DGS provide rich visual infor-
mation, which encapsulates a wealth of geometric details, allowing
for a possible understanding of the underlying geometry structure.
To utilize the RGB information to enrich geometry details, we use
the neural shader module from Worchel et al. [61], which is an
implicit shading field 𝑆(𝒙, 𝒏, 𝒅) that maps a query position along
with its normal and view direction to an RGB colour. The module is
combined with the same differentiable rasterizer 𝑅to render RGB
images. Given a camera view𝐶𝑖with the camera center 𝒄𝑖, we jointly
optimize the shader’s parameters 𝜃and garment vertices 𝒗using
the following RGB loss:
LRGB(𝒗,𝜃) =
1
|I|
∑︁
𝑖∈I
L1(𝑆( ˜𝒗𝑗𝑘, ˜𝒏𝑗𝑘, ˜𝒗𝑗𝑘−𝒄𝑖), (𝐼𝑖)𝑗𝑘),
(3)
where {𝐼𝑖} is the ground truth RGB images rendered from the gen-
erated 3DGS, ˜𝒏= 𝑅({𝒏𝑗}, F𝑡,𝐶𝑖) and ˜𝒗= 𝑅({𝒗𝑗}, F𝑡,𝐶𝑖) are raster-
ized vertex normals and positions, respectively.
Simultaneously, we observed that the neural shader sometimes
brings noise and artifacts, like protrusions and indentations, into
geometry. To address this issue, we need to maintain the necessary
geometry details like wrinkles while removing the noise. We pro-
pose using normal estimation models to obtain estimated normal
maps used for additional guidance, which can capture wrinkles and
the overall normal information of the garment. The ground truth
normal maps {𝑁𝑖} are inferred from the rendered RGB images from
the generated 3DGS by a pre-trained normal estimator, Metric3D
[65]. We then use the following normal loss to guide the geometry
optimization:
LN(𝒗) =
1
|I|
∑︁
𝑖∈I
L1(𝑅({𝒏𝑗}, F𝑡,𝐶𝑖), 𝑁𝑖),
(4)
where {𝒏𝑗} is the set of vertex normals.
Furthermore, the normals at the garment hole regions are not
reliable since the renderings from the 3DGS at these regions are
blurry and directly applying the normal map at the hole regions
to the mesh deform process can result in the closure of the origi-
nal openings. We propose using the coarse-stage mesh as the hole
guidance to maintain the openings. we detect the hole region by
checking the dot product between the garment surface normal and
the camera direction. Specifically, the hole region mask within a


GarmentDreamer: 3DGS Guided Garment Synthesis with Diverse Geometry and Texture Details
•
5
rendered image is defined as
( ˜𝑀𝐻
𝑖)𝑗𝑘= ˜𝒏𝑗𝑘· ( ˜𝒗𝑗𝑘−𝒄𝑖) > 0.
(5)
We use the following hole loss to maintain the holes initially present
in the template mesh after the coarse stage:
L𝐻(𝒗) =
1
|I|
∑︁
𝑖∈𝐼
MSE( ˜𝑀𝐻
𝑖, 𝑀𝐻
𝑖),
(6)
where 𝑀𝐻
𝑖
is the hole mask at the beginning of the fine stage. How-
ever, the mask values are boolean, which are not differentiable. We
manually skip the gradient of the binarization by letting
𝜕L𝐻
𝜕{ ˜𝒏𝑗𝑘· ( ˜𝒗𝑗𝑘−𝑐𝑖)} =
𝜕L𝐻
𝜕( ˜𝑀𝐻
𝑖)𝑖,𝑗
,
(7)
which can provide correct gradient directions.
In summary, the loss function for the fine stage is the weighted
sum of LM, LNC, LL, LN, LH, LRGB. These losses will align the
geometry with the 3DGS appearance but also maintain the openings
of the garment to ensure it is wearable and simulation-ready.
3.4
Texture Synthesis
The final step of GarmentDreamer is to generate detailed textures
for garment meshes. Since our goal is to synthesize simulation-ready
garments with high-fidelity, high-quality textures, simply using the
neural shader previously mentioned to extract vertex colors cannot
achieve this with a limited number of mesh vertices. Notably, the
RGB guidance from the 3DGS retain the original high-quality texture
information in the form of multiple images. Following Instant-NGP
[40], we propose using an implicit Neural Texture Field (NeTF) Φ(𝒙)
to reconstruct these multiview images into high-quality textures,
which can then be easily extracted onto a UV map. The functionality
is equivalent to the aforementioned neural shader without depen-
dency on surface normals and view directions, which maps a query
position 𝒙to its color. We optimize NeTF using the following loss
function:
LT(𝜔) =
1
|I|
∑︁
𝑖∈I
L1(Φ( ˜𝒗𝑗𝑘), (𝐼𝑖)𝑗𝑘),
(8)
where 𝜔is the parameters of the NeTF Φ and ˜𝒗is the rasterized
template mesh vertex positions. Note that this texture reconstruction
step does not require a large number of mesh vertices, allowing us
to achieve both high-quality UV textures and maintain the mesh’s
simulation-ready property without any extra post-process.
For better visual quality and enhanced texture details, we utilize
Variational Score Distillation (VSD) [60] to fine-tune the implicit
texture fields. This process involves forwarding the NeTF to project
a 2D image from a random view and feeding this projected image
into the VSD framework to compute a perceptual loss. By backprop-
agating this loss, we optimize the parameters of NeTF implicitly and
improve the overall texture quality.
After reconstruction and fine-tuning, we can easily query the
color of any mesh point 𝒑, which is baked onto a texture map.
3.5
Garment Simulation
We use the SMPL-X model [41] as the articulated human base to
simulate garment dynamics. Initially, we manually adjust the gar-
ment on the human template by scaling, translating, and altering the
human pose. This rough fitting often results in numerous penetra-
tions. To address this, we employ Position-Based Dynamics (PBD)
[39] to push the garment mesh outside the human body. During
this process, the garments are equipped with high stretching and
bending stiffness to preserve the initial shape. Subsequently, we
apply Codimensional Incremental Potential Contact (CIPC) [27] to
simulate the garments on a human motion sequence, using man-
ually selected physical parameters. The human mesh is treated as
a moving boundary condition. We use CIPC because it can ensure
penetration-free results, which is essential for accurate garment
simulations. Note that the state generated by PBD is merely an
initial feasible state for CIPC. The rest pose of the garment remains
as originally generated, though adjustments in the scale of the pose
can be made to modify the tightness of the fit.
4
EXPERIMENTS
In this section, we conduct a thorough evaluation of Garment-
Dreamer across various garment categories, providing both quanti-
tative and qualitative comparisons with other state-of-the-art 3D
generation methods. We also present ablation studies to highlight
the effectiveness of the key components in our pipeline.
4.1
Showcases
We visualize a range of 3D textured garment meshes generated by
GarmentDreamer, encompassing diverse categories such as dresses,
trousers, shirts, skirts, tees, and jumpsuits. GarmentDreamer not
only produces intricate geometric details that align with pattern
descriptions but also generates a variety of high-quality textures
based on material descriptions. As shown in Fig. 3, GarmentDreamer
successfully creates skirts and tees with consistent denim textures.
Additionally, the generated non-watertight wearable garments are
ready for direct application in simulations and animations. We show-
case four dancing sequences in Fig. 1. Human motion are generated
by Mixamo1. The animation sequences are in Fig. 4.
4.2
Comparison
We compare GarmentDreamer against several state-of-the-art 3D
generation methods: Text2Mesh [37], TextDeformer [14], and Won-
der3D [34]. Text2Mesh and TextDeformer aim to optimize and de-
form an initial mesh to the desired shape indicated in the text prompt.
We use the same template mesh for GarmentDreamer and these
deformation-based methods to ensure fairness. To compare our
method with Wonder3D, which reconstructs 3D meshes from single-
view images, we use DALLE-3 [2] to generate the images from text
prompts as its input. To comprehensively compare GarmentDreamer
with these three methods, we generate 21 distinct types of garments
with each method, including shirts, dresses, skirts, and pants.
4.2.1
Quantitative Comparison. In the absence of a standardized
metric for 3D generation quality, we focus on measuring the consis-
tency between the generated garments and their text prompt inputs.
We render each garment from 36 different views and compute the
average CLIP similarity score between these rendered images and
the corresponding text prompts. Given that TextDeformer does not
handle textures, we render its results using a default color. Typically,
1https://www.mixamo.com/


6
•
Boqian Li, et al.
“a black leather strapless dress”
“a plain blue short sleeve full dress”
“a traditional royal style dress made of blue and gold”
“a American western cowboy style jumpsuit”
“an Iron man upper body armor”
“a silver metal armored trousers”
“a blue denim skirt”
“an orange leather skirt”
“a yellow leather skirt”
“a blue denim shirt”
“a Spiderman shirt”
“a yellow leather tee”
“a pair of flared jeans”
“a black tight leather pants”
“a brown leather pants”
“a blue denim sleeveless tee”
“a Spiderman sleeveless armor”
“a sleeveless tee made of brown leather”
Fig. 3. Garment Gallery. We showcase a gallery of textured garment meshes of different clothing categories generated by GarmentDreamer. We refer to the
supplementary material for closer observations of these garments and more generation results.
text-to-2D/3D works utilize the vanilla CLIP model [45] for evalu-
ating text-to-image alignment. However, this model is optimized
for general subjects and lacks specificity for garment evaluation. To
address this, we employ FashionCLIP [9], a model similar to CLIP
but fine-tuned on a fashion dataset, making it more appropriate for
our purposes.
We report the comparison results in Table. 1, including both the
FashionCLIP Similarity Score (FCSS) and the CLIP Similarity Score
(CSS). Our method, which is specifically designed for 3D garments,
outperforms all baselines in terms of text-garment alignment. Fur-
thermore, our approach demonstrates faster performance compared
to the two deformation-based baselines. Unlike joint optimization
between CLIP-based guidance and mesh deformation, our method
Table 1. Quantitative Comparisons. Our approach outperforms
deformation-based and generative methods on both FashionCLIP similarity
score (FCSS) which is pretrained on fashion datasets and vanilla OpenAI
CLIP similarly score (CSS), supports generating openings on clothing as
well as textures, and runs faster than prior deformation-based methods.
Methods
FCSS
CSS
Wearable
Texture
Runtime
Text2Mesh
0.3396
0.2655
✓
✓
∼20 mins
TextDeformer 0.2367
0.1657
✓
∼35 mins
Wonder3D
0.3402
0.2509
✓
∼4 mins
Ours
0.3413
0.2731
✓
✓
∼15mins
benefits from a decoupled and efficient 3DGS step followed by the
mesh optimization step.
4.2.2
Qualitative Evaluation. GarmentDreamer ensures that the
garment meshes maintain their geometric integrity and exhibit rich,


GarmentDreamer: 3DGS Guided Garment Synthesis with Diverse Geometry and Texture Details
•
7
Fig. 4. We use the SMPL-X mesh sequence to drive the dynamics of our generated garments. The utilization of CIPC resolves frictional collisions and
self-collisions effectively and guarantees non-penetrative results in garment simulations.
“an Iron man upper body armor”
“a black leather dress”
“black tight leather pants”
Ours
Text2Mesh
Text
Deformer
Wonder3D
Fig. 5. Normal Comparisons. We visualize the normal maps for a better comparison of garment geometry between GarmentDreamer and other methods.
Our proposed method generates visually plausible garment meshes, featuring finer geometric details such as natural wrinkles and smooth boundaries.
detailed textures, making them suitable for high-quality visual appli-
cations. We visualize results of GarmentDreamer and other baselines
in Fig. 6 and Fig. 5. The meshes produced by Text2Mesh often appear
distorted with spiky artifacts due to the direct optimization of all
vertex coordinates. TextDeformer alleviates this issue by parameter-
izing deformation as Jacobians, but it tends to miss high-frequency
details, resulting in overly smooth geometry. Wonder3D relies heav-
ily on input images and frequently generates garments with closed
sleeves or necklines due to limited garment-specific knowledge. In
contrast, our method produces non-watertight, simulation-ready
garments with realistic textures, enabling seamless downstream
tasks like animation and virtual try-on.
We further compare with Garment3DGen [47] and WordRobe
[53] using the same text prompts; see Fig. 7. Cargo shorts generated
by [53] have fewer details in grain lines, hemline, seam allowance,
and side seams than ours. Armor created by Garment3DGen [47]
aligns textures with image guidance, while ours generate detailed
high-quality geometric structures.
4.3
Ablation
In Fig. 8, we conduct ablation for key components in Garment-
Dreamer, using the same 21 generated garments in § 4.2.
Hole Loss. We first examine the effectiveness of the proposed
hole loss L𝐻, a crucial component of our proposed 3DGS-guided
mesh deformer, which ensures the openings stay non-closed during
optimization. Without this, mesh deformation tends to enclose the
arm and head holes, resulting in unwearable garment meshes.
Normal Loss. Normal loss L𝑁ensures noise-free meshes. For the
spiderman shirt example in Fig. 8, the garment surface without nor-
mal loss guidance tends to be messy and noisy, and incorrectly rep-
resents Spiderman texture as geometry structures, which is against
fabric design in the real world.
NeTF Enhancement. Our proposed NeTF enhancement via VSD
facilitates better capture of fabrication attributes. As shown in Fig. 8,
it could be observed that without NeTF enhancement, the pocket
of the shirt and the waistband are blurry. In contrast, texture en-
hancement leads to high-quality fabrication details, such as fold


8
•
Boqian Li, et al.
“a blue denim shirt”
“a yellow leather skirt”
“a traditional royal style dress made of blue silk”
Ours
Text2
Mesh
Text
Deformer
Wonder3D
Fig. 6. Qualitative Comparisons. While baseline methods either produce unrealistic geometric artifacts, e.g. spikes and excessive smoothness, or non-garment
textures, GarmentDreamer excels in generating high-quality, simulation-ready non-watertight garments with detailed textures and fine wrinkle details.
“a medieval armor, highly detailed” 
“blue denim cargo shorts” 
Ours
Garment3DGen
Ours
WordRobe
Fig. 7. We compare with images from Garment3DGen [47] and WordRobe [53]. Ours show high-quality details.
lines, grain lines, the seam allowance of the shirt, and clear fly piece,
hemline, seam allowance, and side seam of the jumpsuit, which are
crucial in traditional garment design.
5
LIMITATIONS AND FUTURE WORK
There are several avenues for future research. Firstly, our method
takes minutes rather than seconds for each generation process. Im-
proving its efficiency and scalability is essential for its application to
large-scale garment collections. Secondly, integrating differentiable
physics-based dynamic simulations during the generation process
may provide additional important physical guidance to improve the
realism of the generated garments. Furthermore, parameterizing
the geometry with 2D sewing patterns could offer multiple ben-
efits: they facilitate a seamless connection to the manufacturing
process, ensure a closer match between real and simulated cloth-
ing, and provide a more intuitive design workflow for traditional
fashion designers. Lastly, similar to other SDS-based 3D generation
approaches, our method currently bakes some lighting effects such
as specular highlights and shadows into the color map. Separating
these effects via learning Physically-Based Rendering (PBR) materi-
als would likely improve the quality and realism of the results.
REFERENCES
[1] Hugo Bertiche, Meysam Madadi, and Sergio Escalera. 2020. Cloth3d: clothed 3d
humans. In European Conference on Computer Vision. Springer, 344–359.
[2] James Betker, Gabriel Goh, Li Jing, Tim Brooks, Jianfeng Wang, Linjie Li, Long
Ouyang, Juntang Zhuang, Joyce Lee, Yufei Guo, et al. 2023. Improving image gen-
eration with better captions. Computer Science. https://cdn. openai. com/papers/dall-
e-3. pdf 2, 3 (2023), 8.
[3] Mario Botsch and Olga Sorkine. 2007. On linear variational surface deformation
methods. IEEE transactions on visualization and computer graphics 14, 1 (2007),


GarmentDreamer: 3DGS Guided Garment Synthesis with Diverse Geometry and Texture Details
•
9
“a blue denim shirt”
“a Spiderman shirt”
“a pair of flared jeans”
w/o hole loss ℒ𝐻𝐻: incorrect opening 
w/o normal loss ℒ𝑁𝑁: texture mislead as geometry 
w/o normal loss ℒ𝑁𝑁: texture mislead as geometry 
final mesh ℱ𝑔𝑔
w/o texture enhancement
w/ texture enhancement
Fig. 8. Ablation Study. From top to bottom are results of GarmentDreamer without hole loss L𝐻, normal loss L𝑁, final mesh without texture, texture
without refinement, and final textured mesh respectively. Hole loss L𝐻, normal loss L𝑁offers clear openings, noise-free surface of the generated garment
mesh. Texture enhancement provides high-quality details in hemline, seam allowance, grain line and wrinkles.
213–230.
[4] Andrés Casado-Elvira, Marc Comino Trinidad, and Dan Casas. 2022. PERGAMO:
Personalized 3d garments from monocular video. In Computer Graphics Forum,
Vol. 41. Wiley Online Library, 293–304.
[5] Dave Zhenyu Chen, Yawar Siddiqui, Hsin-Ying Lee, Sergey Tulyakov, and
Matthias Nießner. 2023. Text2tex: Text-driven texture synthesis via diffusion
models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer
Vision. 18558–18568.
[6] Jianchuan Chen, Wentao Yi, Liqian Ma, Xu Jia, and Huchuan Lu. 2023. GM-NeRF:
Learning generalizable model-based Neural Radiance Fields from multi-view
images. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition. 20648–20658.
[7] Lan Chen, Lin Gao, Jie Yang, Shibiao Xu, Juntao Ye, Xiaopeng Zhang, and Yu-Kun
Lai. 2023. Deep deformation detail synthesis for thin shell models. In Computer
Graphics Forum, Vol. 42. Wiley Online Library, e14903.
[8] Zilong Chen, Yikai Wang, Feng Wang, Zhengyi Wang, and Huaping Liu. 2024. V3d:
Video diffusion models are effective 3d generators. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.06738
(2024).
[9] Patrick John Chia, Giuseppe Attanasio, Federico Bianchi, Silvia Terragni, Ana Rita
Magalhães, Diogo Goncalves, Ciro Greco, and Jacopo Tagliabue. 2022. Contrastive
language and vision learning of general fashion concepts. Scientific Reports 12, 1
(2022), 18958.
[10] Gene Chou, Yuval Bahat, and Felix Heide. 2023. Diffusion-sdf: Conditional gen-
erative modeling of signed distance functions. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF


10
•
Boqian Li, et al.
International Conference on Computer Vision. 2262–2272.
[11] CLO3D. 2024. CLO3D garment design software. https://www.clo3d.com
[12] Luca De Luigi, Ren Li, Benoît Guillard, Mathieu Salzmann, and Pascal Fua. 2023.
Drapenet: Garment generation and self-supervised draping. In Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. 1451–1460.
[13] Harm De Vries, Florian Strub, Jérémie Mary, Hugo Larochelle, Olivier Pietquin,
and Aaron C Courville. 2017. Modulating early visual processing by language.
Advances in neural information processing systems 30 (2017).
[14] William Gao, Noam Aigerman, Thibault Groueix, Vova Kim, and Rana Hanocka.
2023. Textdeformer: Geometry manipulation using text guidance. In ACM SIG-
GRAPH 2023 Conference Proceedings. 1–11.
[15] Benoit Guillard, Federico Stella, and Pascal Fua. 2022. Meshudf: Fast and differen-
tiable meshing of unsigned distance field networks. In European conference on
computer vision. Springer, 576–592.
[16] Kai He, Kaixin Yao, Qixuan Zhang, Jingyi Yu, Lingjie Liu, and Lan Xu. 2024. Dress-
Code: Autoregressively Sewing and Generating Garments from Text Guidance.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.16465 (2024).
[17] Yi He, Haoran Xie, and Kazunori Miyata. 2023. Sketch2Cloth: Sketch-based 3D
garment generation with unsigned distance fields. In 2023 Nicograph International
(NicoInt). IEEE, 38–45.
[18] Yicong Hong, Kai Zhang, Jiuxiang Gu, Sai Bi, Yang Zhou, Difan Liu, Feng Liu,
Kalyan Sunkavalli, Trung Bui, and Hao Tan. 2023. Lrm: Large reconstruction
model for single image to 3d. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.04400 (2023).
[19] Shuo Huang, Zongxin Yang, Liangting Li, Yi Yang, and Jia Jia. 2023. AvatarFusion:
Zero-shot Generation of Clothing-Decoupled 3D Avatars Using 2D Diffusion.
(2023), 5734–5745.
[20] Xin Huang, Ruizhi Shao, Qi Zhang, Hongwen Zhang, Ying Feng, Yebin Liu, and
Qing Wang. 2023. Humannorm: Learning normal diffusion model for high-quality
and realistic 3d human generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.01406 (2023).
[21] Suyi Jiang, Haimin Luo, Haoran Jiang, Ziyu Wang, Jingyi Yu, and Lan Xu. 2023.
MVHuman: Tailoring 2D Diffusion with Multi-view Sampling For Realistic 3D
Human Generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.10120 (2023).
[22] Bernhard Kerbl, Georgios Kopanas, Thomas Leimkühler, and George Drettakis.
2023. 3d gaussian splatting for real-time radiance field rendering. ACM Transac-
tions on Graphics 42, 4 (2023), 1–14.
[23] Byungjun Kim, Patrick Kwon, Kwangho Lee, Myunggi Lee, Sookwan Han, Daesik
Kim, and Hanbyul Joo. 2023. Chupa: Carving 3d clothed humans from skinned
shape priors using 2d diffusion probabilistic models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
International Conference on Computer Vision. 15965–15976.
[24] Samuli Laine, Janne Hellsten, Tero Karras, Yeongho Seol, Jaakko Lehtinen, and
Timo Aila. 2020. Modular Primitives for High-Performance Differentiable Ren-
dering. ACM Transactions on Graphics 39, 6 (2020).
[25] Lei Lan, Zixuan Lu, Jingyi Long, Chun Yuan, Xuan Li, Xiaowei He, Huamin
Wang, Chenfanfu Jiang, and Yin Yang. 2024. Mil2: Efficient Cloth Simulation
Using Non-distance Barriers and Subspace Reuse. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.19272
(2024).
[26] Jumin Lee, Sebin Lee, Changho Jo, Woobin Im, Juhyeong Seon, and Sung-Eui
Yoon. 2024. SemCity: Semantic Scene Generation with Triplane Diffusion. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2403.07773 (2024).
[27] Minchen Li, Danny M Kaufman, and Chenfanfu Jiang. 2021. Codimensional
incremental potential contact. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG) 40, 4 (2021),
1–24.
[28] Weiyu Li, Rui Chen, Xuelin Chen, and Ping Tan. 2023. Sweetdreamer: Align-
ing geometric priors in 2d diffusion for consistent text-to-3d. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2310.02596 (2023).
[29] Xuan Li, Yu Fang, Lei Lan, Huamin Wang, Yin Yang, Minchen Li, and Chenfanfu
Jiang. 2023. Subspace-Preconditioned GPU Projective Dynamics with Contact
for Cloth Simulation. In SIGGRAPH Asia 2023 Conference Papers. 1–12.
[30] Yifei Li, Hsiao-yu Chen, Egor Larionov, Nikolaos Sarafianos, Wojciech Matusik,
and Tuur Stuyck. 2023. DiffAvatar: Simulation-Ready Garment Optimization with
Differentiable Simulation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.12194 (2023).
[31] Tingting Liao, Hongwei Yi, Yuliang Xiu, Jiaxaing Tang, Yangyi Huang, Justus
Thies, and Michael J Black. 2023. Tada! text to animatable digital avatars. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2308.10899 (2023).
[32] Fangfu Liu, Diankun Wu, Yi Wei, Yongming Rao, and Yueqi Duan. 2023. Sherpa3D:
Boosting High-Fidelity Text-to-3D Generation via Coarse 3D Prior. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2312.06655 (2023).
[33] Lijuan Liu, Xiangyu Xu, Zhijie Lin, Jiabin Liang, and Shuicheng Yan. 2023. To-
wards garment sewing pattern reconstruction from a single image. ACM Trans-
actions on Graphics (TOG) 42, 6 (2023), 1–15.
[34] Xiaoxiao Long, Yuan-Chen Guo, Cheng Lin, Yuan Liu, Zhiyang Dou, Lingjie
Liu, Yuexin Ma, Song-Hai Zhang, Marc Habermann, Christian Theobalt, et al.
2023. Wonder3d: Single image to 3d using cross-domain diffusion. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2310.15008 (2023).
[35] Shitong Luo and Wei Hu. 2021. Diffusion probabilistic models for 3d point cloud
generation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition. 2837–2845.
[36] Maya. 2024. Autodesk Maya. https://www.autodesk.com/products/maya/
[37] Oscar Michel, Roi Bar-On, Richard Liu, Sagie Benaim, and Rana Hanocka. 2022.
Text2mesh: Text-driven neural stylization for meshes. In Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. 13492–13502.
[38] Matthias Müller and Nuttapong Chentanez. 2010. Wrinkle Meshes.. In Symposium
on Computer Animation, Vol. 16. Madrid, Spain.
[39] Matthias Müller, Bruno Heidelberger, Marcus Hennix, and John Ratcliff. 2007. Po-
sition based dynamics. Journal of Visual Communication and Image Representation
18, 2 (2007), 109–118.
[40] Thomas Müller, Alex Evans, Christoph Schied, and Alexander Keller. 2022. In-
stant neural graphics primitives with a multiresolution hash encoding. ACM
transactions on graphics (TOG) 41, 4 (2022), 1–15.
[41] Georgios Pavlakos, Vasileios Choutas, Nima Ghorbani, Timo Bolkart, Ahmed AA
Osman, Dimitrios Tzionas, and Michael J Black. 2019. Expressive body capture:
3d hands, face, and body from a single image. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
conference on computer vision and pattern recognition. 10975–10985.
[42] Ben Poole, Ajay Jain, Jonathan T Barron, and Ben Mildenhall. 2022. Dreamfusion:
Text-to-3d using 2d diffusion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.14988 (2022).
[43] Guocheng Qian, Jinjie Mai, Abdullah Hamdi, Jian Ren, Aliaksandr Siarohin, Bing
Li, Hsin-Ying Lee, Ivan Skorokhodov, Peter Wonka, Sergey Tulyakov, et al. 2023.
Magic123: One image to high-quality 3d object generation using both 2d and 3d
diffusion priors. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.17843 (2023).
[44] Lingteng Qiu, Guanying Chen, Xiaodong Gu, Qi Zuo, Mutian Xu, Yushuang Wu,
Weihao Yuan, Zilong Dong, Liefeng Bo, and Xiaoguang Han. 2023. Richdreamer:
A generalizable normal-depth diffusion model for detail richness in text-to-3d.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.16918 (2023).
[45] Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sand-
hini Agarwal, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al.
2021. Learning transferable visual models from natural language supervision. In
International conference on machine learning. PMLR, 8748–8763.
[46] Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn
Ommer. 2022. High-resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition.
10684–10695.
[47] Nikolaos Sarafianos, Tuur Stuyck, Xiaoyu Xiang, Yilei Li, Jovan Popovic, and
Rakesh Ranjan. 2024. Garment3DGen: 3D Garment Stylization and Texture
Generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.18816 (2024).
[48] Tianchang Shen, Jun Gao, Kangxue Yin, Ming-Yu Liu, and Sanja Fidler. 2021.
Deep marching tetrahedra: a hybrid representation for high-resolution 3d shape
synthesis. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 34 (2021), 6087–
6101.
[49] Yu Shen, Junbang Liang, and Ming C Lin. 2020. Gan-based garment generation
using sewing pattern images. In Computer Vision–ECCV 2020: 16th European
Conference, Glasgow, UK, August 23–28, 2020, Proceedings, Part XVIII 16. Springer,
225–247.
[50] Jaehyeok Shim, Changwoo Kang, and Kyungdon Joo. 2023. Diffusion-based signed
distance fields for 3d shape generation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. 20887–20897.
[51] J Ryan Shue, Eric Ryan Chan, Ryan Po, Zachary Ankner, Jiajun Wu, and Gordon
Wetzstein. 2023. 3d neural field generation using triplane diffusion. In Proceedings
of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. 20875–
20886.
[52] Olga Sorkine, Daniel Cohen-Or, Yaron Lipman, Marc Alexa, Christian Rössl, and
H-P Seidel. 2004. Laplacian surface editing. In Proceedings of the 2004 Eurograph-
ics/ACM SIGGRAPH symposium on Geometry processing. 175–184.
[53] Astitva Srivastava, Pranav Manu, Amit Raj, Varun Jampani, and Avinash Sharma.
2024. WordRobe: Text-Guided Generation of Textured 3D Garments. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2403.17541 (2024).
[54] Style3D. 2024. Style3D digital fashion solution. https://www.linctex.com
[55] Jiapeng Tang, Yinyu Nie, Lev Markhasin, Angela Dai, Justus Thies, and Matthias
Nießner. 2023. Diffuscene: Scene graph denoising diffusion probabilistic model
for generative indoor scene synthesis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.14207 (2023).
[56] Jiaxiang Tang, Jiawei Ren, Hang Zhou, Ziwei Liu, and Gang Zeng. 2023. Dream-
gaussian: Generative gaussian splatting for efficient 3d content creation. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2309.16653 (2023).
[57] An Dinh Vuong, Minh Nhat Vu, Toan Nguyen, Baoru Huang, Dzung Nguyen,
Thieu Vo, and Anh Nguyen. 2024. Language-driven Scene Synthesis using Multi-
conditional Diffusion Model. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
36 (2024).
[58] Jionghao Wang, Yuan Liu, Zhiyang Dou, Zhengming Yu, Yongqing Liang, Xin
Li, Wenping Wang, Rong Xie, and Li Song. 2023. Disentangled Clothed Avatar
Generation from Text Descriptions. (2023). arXiv:2312.05295 [cs.CV]
[59] Yue Wang, Yongbin Sun, Ziwei Liu, Sanjay E Sarma, Michael M Bronstein, and
Justin M Solomon. 2019. Dynamic graph cnn for learning on point clouds. ACM
Transactions on Graphics (tog) 38, 5 (2019), 1–12.
