Title: Animatable and relightable gaussians for high-fidelity human avatar modeling

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021
1
Animatable and Relightable Gaussians
for High-fidelity Human Avatar Modeling
Zhe Li∗, Yipengjing Sun∗, Zerong Zheng, Lizhen Wang, Shengping Zhang and Yebin Liu, Member, IEEE
https://animatable-gaussians.github.io/relight
Abstract—Modeling animatable human avatars from RGB
videos is a long-standing and challenging problem. Recent works
usually adopt MLP-based neural radiance fields (NeRF) to
represent 3D humans, but it remains difficult for pure MLPs
to regress pose-dependent garment details. To this end, we
introduce Animatable Gaussians, a new avatar representation
that leverages powerful 2D CNNs and 3D Gaussian splatting
to create high-fidelity avatars. To associate 3D Gaussians with
the animatable avatar, we learn a parametric template from the
input videos, and then parameterize the template on two front
& back canonical Gaussian maps where each pixel represents a
3D Gaussian. The learned template is adaptive to the wearing
garments for modeling looser clothes like dresses. Such template-
guided 2D parameterization enables us to employ a powerful
StyleGAN-based CNN to learn the pose-dependent Gaussian
maps for modeling detailed dynamic appearances. Furthermore,
we introduce a pose projection strategy for better generalization
given novel poses. To tackle the realistic relighting of animatable
avatars, we introduce physically-based rendering into the avatar
representation for decomposing avatar materials and environ-
ment illumination. Overall, our method can create lifelike avatars
with dynamic, realistic, generalized and relightable appearances.
Experiments show that our method outperforms other state-of-
the-art approaches.
Index Terms—Animatable avatar, human reconstruction, view
synthesis, animation, relighting.
I. INTRODUCTION
A
NIMATABLE human avatar modeling, due to its poten-
tial value in holoportation, Metaverse, game and movie
industries, has been a popular topic in computer vision for
decades. However, how to effectively represent the human
avatar is still a challenging problem.
Explicit representations, including both meshes and point
clouds, are the prevailing choices, not just in human avatars but
also throughout the entire 3D vision and graphics. However,
previous explicit avatar representations [1]–[3] necessitate
dense reconstructed meshes to model human geometry, thus
limiting their applications in sparse-view video-based avatar
modeling. In the past few years, with the rise of implicit
representations, particularly neural radiance fields (NeRF) [4],
many researchers tend to represent the 3D human as a pose-
conditioned NeRF [5]–[8] to automatically learn a neural
avatar from RGB videos. However, implicit representations
∗indicates equal contribution.
Zhe Li, Lizhen Wang and Yebin Liu are with Department of Automation,
Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, P.R.China. Yipengjing Sun and Sheng-
ping Zhang are with the School of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin
Institute of Technology, Weihai 264209, P.R. China. Zerong Zheng is with
NNKosmos Technology, Hangzhou, P.R.China.
Corresponding author: Yebin Liu and Shengping Zhang.
require a coordinate-based MLP to regress a continuous field,
suffering from the low-frequency spectral bias [9] of MLPs.
Although many works aim to enhance the avatar representation
by texture feature [6] or structured local NeRFs [7], they fail
to produce satisfactory results because they still rely on an
MLP to output the continuous implicit fields.
Recently, 3D Gaussian splatting [10], an explicit and effi-
cient point-based representation, has been proposed for both
high-fidelity rendering quality and real-time rendering speed.
In contrary to implicit representations, explicit point-based
representations have the potential to be parameterized on
2D maps [3], thus enabling us to employ more powerful
2D networks for modeling higher-fidelity avatars. Based on
this observation, we present Animatable Gaussians, a new
avatar representation that leverages 3D Gaussian splatting and
powerful 2D CNNs for realistic avatar modeling. The first
challenge lies in modeling general garments including long
dresses. Inspired by point-based geometric avatars [11], [12],
we first reconstruct a parametric template from the input
videos and inherit the parameters of SMPL [13] by diffusing
the skinning weights [11]. The character-specific template
models the basic shapes of the wearing garments, even for long
dresses. This allows us to animate 3D Gaussians in accordance
with the template motion while avoiding density control in
standard Gaussians [10], thereby ensuring the maintenance
of a temporally consistent structure for 3D Gaussians in the
following 2D parameterization.
For compatibility with 2D networks, it is necessary to
parameterize the 3D template onto 2D maps. However, it
remains challenging to unwrap the template with arbitrary
topologies onto a unified and continuous UV space. Regarding
that the front & back views almost cover the entire canonical
human, we achieve the parameterization by orthogonally pro-
jecting the canonical template to both views. In each view,
we define every pixel within the template mask as a 3D
Gaussian, represented by its position, covariance, opacity, and
color attributes, resulting in two front & back Gaussian maps.
Similarly, given the driving pose, we obtain two posed position
maps that serve as the pose conditions. Such a template-guided
parameterization enables predicting pose-dependent Gaussian
maps from the pose conditions through a powerful StyleGAN-
based [14]–[16] conditional generator, StyleUNet [17].
Benefiting from the powerful 2D CNNs and explicit 3D
Gaussian splatting, our method can faithfully reconstruct hu-
man details under training poses. On the other hand, given
novel poses, the generalization of animatable avatars has not
been extensively explored. Due to the data-driven nature of
arXiv:2311.16096v4  [cs.CV]  25 May 2024


JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021
2
Fig. 1.
Lifelike relightable and animatable avatars with highly dynamic, realistic and generalized details created by our method. We show synthesized results
animated by the same pose under the capture environment and novel lights.
learning-based avatar modeling, direct extrapolation to poses
out of distribution will certainly yield unsatisfactory results.
Therefore, we propose to employ Principal Component Anal-
ysis (PCA) to project the driving pose signal, represented by
the position maps, into the PCA space, facilitating reasonable
interpolation within the distribution of training poses. Such a
pose projection strategy realizes reasonable and high-quality
synthesis for novel poses.
A preliminary version of this work has been published
in CVPR 2024 [18], in which we propose a novel avatar
representation for modeling realistic animatable human avatars
from multi-view videos. However, the preliminary work [18]
can only animate the avatar under illumination from the cap-
ture environment. In the current version, we further introduce
physically-based rendering (PBR) [19], [20] into our avatar
representation for creating both animatable and relightable
human avatars. Specifically, besides the original attributes of
3D Gaussians, our model also predicts albedo, roughness,
and light visibility to decompose the avatar materials and
illumination of the capture environment. As a result, our model
can produce realistic animation under novel illumination.
We extend the preliminary version [18] in the following
ways. First, we introduce PBR into our avatar representation
(Animatable Gaussians) for creating relightable human avatars.
Second, we compare our method with concurrent works on 3D
Gaussian splatting-based avatars, and our method outperforms
them on the avatar quality. Third, we compare our method
with other works on human performance relighting, and our
method can produce more realistic human relighting.
In summary, our technical contributions are:
• Animatable Gaussians, a new avatar representation that
introduces explicit 3D Gaussian splatting into avatar mod-
eling to employ powerful 2D CNNs for creating lifelike
avatars with high-fidelity pose-dependent dynamics.
• Template-guided parameterization that learns a character-
specific template for general clothes like dresses, and
parameterizes 3D Gaussians onto front & back Gaussian
maps for compatibility with 2D networks.
• A simple yet effective pose projection strategy that
employs PCA on the driving signal, promoting better
generalization to novel poses.
• We introduce physically-based rendering into Animatable
Gaussians for photorealistic relighting under novel illu-
mination.
Overall, benefiting from these contributions, our method can
create lifelike animatable and relightable avatars with highly
dynamic, realistic and generalized appearances as shown in
Fig. 1. The code is available at https://github.com/lizhe00/
AnimatableGaussians, and earns more than 700 stars.
II. RELATED WORK
A. Mesh-based Human Avatars
The polygon mesh is the most popular 3D representation for
its compatibility with traditional rendering pipelines. To model
animatable human avatars using meshes, early approaches
propose to reconstruct a character-specific textured mesh and
animate it by physical simulation [21], [22] or retrieval from
a database [23]. Recently, researchers tend to utilize neural
networks to model dynamic textures and motions. Bagautdinov
et al. [1], Xiang et al. [2], [24] and Halimi et al. [25]
reconstruct topology-consistent meshes from dense multi-view
videos and learn the dynamic texture in a UV space. DDC [26]
and HDHumans [27] learn the deformation parameterized by
both skeletons and embedded graph [28] of a pre-scanned
template. DELIFFAS [29] employs DDC as a deformable
template and parameterizes the light field around the body
onto double surfaces for fast synthesis. These mesh-based
methods require dense reconstruction, non-rigid tracking, or
pre-scanned templates for representing dynamic humans. Be-
sides, some works optimize the non-rigid deformation upon
SMPL [13] from a monocular RGB [30]–[32] or RGB-D [33],
[34] video, but the avatar quality is limited by the SMPL+D
representation.
B. Implicit Function-based Human Avatars
Implicit function is a coordinate-based function, usually
represented by an MLP, that outputs a continuous field, e.g.,
signed distance function (SDF) [35], [36], occupancy [37],
and radiance (NeRF) [5] fields. In geometric avatar modeling,
many works represent the human avatar as pose-conditioned
SDF [38]–[42] or occupancy [37], [43]–[47] fields learned
from human scans or depth sequences. In contrast, NeRF
containing a density and color field is widely used in textured
avatar modeling [48]–[56] because of its good differentiable
property. Animatable NeRF [5] introduces SMPL deformation


JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021
3
into NeRF for animatable human modeling. Neural Actor [6]
and UV volumes [57] parameterize 3D humans on SMPL
or DensePose [58] UV space, thus limiting modeling loose
clothes far from the human body. SLRF [7] defines local
NeRF around sampled nodes upon SMPL and learns the pose-
dependent dynamics in the local space. TAVA [8] models the
human or animal deformation using only 3D skeletons without
the requirement of a parametric model. ARAH [59] represents
the avatar geometry as SDF and adopts SDF-based volume
rendering [60], [61] for learning more plausible geometry from
RGB videos. DANBO [62] employs GNNs to learn the part-
based pose feature. Li et al. [63] introduce a learnable pose
vocabulary to learn higher-frequency pose conditions for the
conditional NeRF. Besides the body avatar, TotalSelfScan [64],
X-Avatar [65] and AvatarReX [66] propose compositional
full-body avatars for expressive control of the human body,
hands and face. However, the implicit function-based methods
usually adopt pure MLPs to represent the human avatar,
yielding smooth or blurry quality due to the low-frequency
bias of MLPs [9]. What’s worse, the rendering speed of these
methods is usually slow because rendering from implicit fields
requires dense sampling along a ray.
C. Point-based Human Avatars
Point cloud is also a powerful and popular representation
in human avatar modeling. Given 3D scans of a character,
SCALE [67] and POP [3] learn the non-rigid deformation of
dense points on SMPL UV maps to represent the dynamic
garment wrinkles. FITE [11] and CloSET [68] extract pose
features from projective maps or PointNet [69], [70] to avoid
discontinuity on the UV map. SKiRT [12] and FITE learn a
coarse template from the input scans and utilize learned or
diffused skinning weights to animate loose clothes. Prokudin
et al. [71] propose dynamic point fields for general dynamic
reconstruction. This work and NPC [72] show results on
avatars created from RGB videos using Point-NeRF [73].
However, applying Point-NeRF to avatar modeling still relies
on a low-frequency coordinate-based MLP, struggling with the
same problems in Sec. II-B. On the other hand, point-based
rendering via splatting [74]–[82] offers another probability for
animatable avatar modeling. PointAvatar [83] learns a canon-
ical point cloud and deformation field to model head avatars
from a monocular video via PyTorch3D’s [84] differentiable
point renderer.
Recently, 3D Gaussian splatting [10] (3DGS), an efficient
differentiable point-based rendering method, has been pro-
posed for real-time photo-realistic scene rendering. Along
with extending 3DGS to dynamic scene modeling [85]–[88],
many researchers also introduced 3DGS into animatable hu-
man avatars. Specifically, D3GA [89] leverages cage-based
deformation to model the motion of 3D Gaussians. While other
approaches like GART [90], 3DGS-Avatar [91], GauHuman
[92] and HUGS [93] employ linear blend skinning (LBS) to
model human motions and reconstruct a 3DGS-based animat-
able avatar from monocular videos. However, these approaches
cannot produce highly realistic and dynamic human appear-
ances because they all represent the canonical 3D human using
MLPs, facing the same low-frequency problem as NeRF-based
approaches (Sec. II-B). We observe such an explicit point-
based representation can be combined with 2D CNNs for high-
quality avatar modeling. Concurrent works including ASH
[94] and GaussianAvatar [95] parameterize the 3D character
on a 2D UV map to predict Gaussian attributes using 2D
CNNs, sharing similar ideas with our method. Differently, we
parameterize the canonical 3D human on the front and back
views by orthographic projection.
D. Human Relighting
Human relighting aims to manipulate the reflectance field
of the human surface, thus enabling an immersive fusion with
novel illumination. Conventional approaches [96]–[103] pro-
pose capturing the reflectance characteristics of a human sub-
ject through a LightStage arrangement. This setup entails con-
trolled illumination systems and dense camera arrays, facili-
tating the generation of photorealistic renderings under diverse
lighting conditions. However, such configurations are both
financially demanding to capture and not readily accessible
to the public. With the advancement of neural implicit repre-
sentations, recent methods [36], [104]–[108] necessitate solely
multi-view or even monocular video recordings obtained un-
der constant unknown illumination conditions to model both
human motion and light transport properties. Relighting4D
[104] employs NeuralBody [109] as the dynamic human model
and utilizes neural inverse rendering to decompose it into
a 3D reflectance field, enabling the estimation of materials
and lighting properties. Building upon this framework, Sun
et al. [106] apply LBS to transform the reflectance field
from the canonical space to the observation space, facilitating
animated sequences with relighting effects. However, this work
does not address shadowing effects. RANA [105] pretrains
an SMPL+D-based representation incorporating albedo and
normal map refinement techniques. It utilizes a simplified
spherical harmonics lighting model to achieve relighting ef-
fects but lacks the capability to accurately model specular
effects and shadows. Lin et al. [107] propose to estimate pose-
aware light visibility through part-wise MLPs, demonstrating
improved shadowing estimation when generalizing to unseen
poses. Xu et al. [36] utilize Hierarchical Distance Queries
(HDQ) via sphere tracing to calculate correct SDF values
under arbitrary human poses and then incorporate distant field
soft shadow (DFSS) for estimating reasonable soft visibility
maps. IntrinsicAvatar [108] employs explicit Monte-Carlo
ray tracing in canonical space to capture secondary shading
effects, thereby enabling precise estimation of materials and
environmental lighting. However, most previous methods rely
on NeRF-based techniques, which inherently yield limited
rendering quality. Thanks to the proposed powerful Gaussian
representation, our method can achieve more vivid and realistic
relighting results under novel poses.
III. METHOD
A. Preliminary: 3D Gaussian Splatting
3D Gaussian splatting [10] is an explicit point-based 3D
representation that consists of a set of 3D Gaussians. Each 3D


JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021
4
Fig. 2.
Illustration of the avatar modeling pipeline. It contains two main steps: 1) Reconstruct a character-specific template from multi-view images.
2) Predict pose-dependent Gaussian and intrinsic maps through StyleUNets, and render the posed Gaussians by Gaussian splatting and physically-based
rendering to learn both pose-dependent dynamics and avatar materials. Finally, given a novel environment light, we can animate the avatar with realistic
dynamic appearances and shadow effects.
Gaussian is parameterized by its position (mean) µ, covariance
matrix Σ, opacity α and color c, and its probability density
function is formulated as
f(x|µ, Σ) = exp

−1
2(x −µ)⊤Σ−1(x −µ)

,
(1)
where we omit the constant factor in Eq. 1. For rendering a 2D
image, the 3D Gaussians are splatted onto 2D planes, resulting
in 2D Gaussians. The pixel color C is computed by blending
N ordered 2D Gaussians overlapping this pixel:
C =
N
X
i=1
αi
i−1
Y
j=1
(1 −αj)ci,
(2)
where ci is the color of each 2D Gaussian, and αi is the
blending weight derived from the learned opacity and 2D
Gaussian distribution [75].
B. Overview
Given multi-view RGB videos of a character and the cor-
responding SMPL-X [110] registrations about the per-frame
pose and shared shape, our objective is to create a lifelike
animatable avatar. As illustrated in Fig. 2, our method contains
two main steps:
1) Learning Parametric Template. We begin by selecting
a frame with a near A-pose from the input videos,
and then optimize a canonical SDF and color field
to fit the multi-view images through SMPL skinning
and SDF-based volume rendering [60]. The template
mesh is subsequently extracted from the canonical SDF
field using Marching Cubes [111]. We then diffuse the
skinning weights from the SMPL vertices to the template
surface, obtaining a deformable parametric template.
2) Learning Pose-dependent Gaussian and Intrinsic
Maps. Given a training pose, we first deform the tem-
plate to the posed space via linear blend skinning (LBS)
and render the posed vertex coordinates to canonical
front & back views to obtain two position maps. The po-
sition maps serve as the pose condition and are translated
into front & back Gaussian and intrinsic maps through
StyleUNets [17]. We then extract valid 3D Gaussians
inside the template mask from the Gaussian map, and
deform the canonical 3D Gaussians to the posed space
by LBS. In one branch, we directly render the posed 3D
Gaussians to a camera view using the observed colors
on the Gaussian maps. On the other hand, we render
the posed 3D Gaussians using the PBR color computed
from the intrinsic maps. These two branches allow our
method not only to learn pose-dependent animation but
also to decompose the avatar appearance into materials
and light conditions for relighting purposes.
C. Avatar Representation
1) Learning Parametric Template: Given the multi-view
videos, we first select one frame in which the character is
under a near A-pose. Our goal is to reconstruct a canonical
geometric model as the template from the multi-view images.
Specifically, we represent the canonical character as an SDF
and color field instantiated by an MLP. To associate the
canonical and posed spaces, we precompute a skinning weight
volume W in the canonical space by diffusing the weights
from the SMPL surface throughout the whole 3D volume
along the surface normal [11]. For each point in the posed
space, we search its canonical correspondence by root finding
[44]:
min
xc ∥LBS(xc; Θ, W) −xp∥2
2 ,
(3)


JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021
5
Fig. 3. Illustration of the posed position maps.
where LBS(·) is a linear blend skinning function that trans-
forms a canonical point xc to its posed position xp in
accordance with the SMPL pose Θ. Then the canonical
correspondence is fed into the MLP to query its SDF and
color, which are used to render RGB images by SDF-based
volume rendering [60]. The rendered images are compared
with the ground truth for optimizing the canonical fields
via differentiable volume rendering. Finally, we extract the
geometric template from the SDF field and query the skinning
weights for each vertex in the precomputed weight volume W,
obtaining a deformable parametric template.
2) Template-guided
Parameterization:
Previous
human
avatar representations in NeRF-based approaches [5]–[7] ne-
cessitate the coordinate-based MLPs for the formulation of the
implicit NeRF function. However, MLPs have demonstrated a
low-frequency bias [9], hindering their ability to model high-
frequency human dynamics. In light of this observation, we
replace MLPs with more powerful 2D CNNs for creating
higher-quality human avatars. To ensure compatibility with 2D
networks, the 3D representation of the human avatar needs
to be parameterized in 2D space. Therefore, we propose to
parameterize the 3D Gaussians anchored on the canonical
template onto front & back views via orthogonal projection.
As illustrated in Fig. 3, given a driving pose Θ, we first
deform the template to the posed space via LBS. Note that
we do not consider the global transformation in this skinning
process, because the global orientation and translation would
not change the human dynamic details. Then we take the posed
coordinate as the vertex color on the canonical template, and
render it to both front & back views by orthogonal projection,
obtaining posed position maps Pf(Θ) and Pb(Θ) that serve
as pose conditions for the network.
3) Pose-dependent Gaussian Maps: We employ a powerful
StyleGAN-based CNN , StyleUNet [17] FG, to predict pose-
dependent Gaussian maps from the pose conditions:
Gf(Θ), Gb(Θ) ←FG(Pf(Θ), Pb(Θ), V),
(4)
where Gf(Θ) and Gb(Θ) are front and back pose-dependent
Gaussian maps, respectively, and each pixel represents a 3D
Gaussian [10] including a position, covariance, opacity and
color. To ensure that the position attribute of predicted Gaus-
sian maps approximates the canonical human body, we opt
to predict an offset map ∆O(Θ) on the parametric template
instead of a global position map. We also modulate the
output color attributes on Gaussian maps with a view direction
map V to model view-dependent variance like NeRF-based
approaches [5]. We extract canonical 3D Gaussians inside the
Fig. 4. Canonical 3D Gaussians on side regions and hands.
template mask from the pose-dependent Gaussian maps. It is
worth mentioning that despite utilizing only front and back
views for parameterizing the 3D Gaussians, the resulting point
clouds still cover the side regions and hands of the human body
as demonstrated in Fig. 4. The reason is that the projection to
front & back views is orthographic, thus there exist sufficient
3D Gaussians to model these parts.
4) LBS of 3D Gaussians: To render the synthesized avatar
under the driving pose, we need to deform the canonical 3D
Gaussians to the posed space. Specifically, given a canonical
3D Gaussian, we transform its position pc and covariance Σc
attributes:
pp = Rpc + t,
Σp = RΣcR⊤,
(5)
where R and t are the rotation matrix and translation vector
calculated with the skinning weights of each 3D Gaussian.
Finally, we render the posed 3D Gaussians to a desired camera
view through splatting-based rasterization (Eq. 2).
5) Pose-dependent Intrinsic Maps:
The pose-dependent
Gaussian maps only represent the human appearances under
the illumination of the capture environment, limiting animation
under novel lighting conditions. To disentangle the avatar
geometry, material and lighting conditions, we leverage the
classic rendering equation [112] to simulate the rendering
process:
Lo(x, ωo) =
Z
Ω
Li(x, ω)f(x, ωi, ωo; α, γ, n)(ωi · n)dωi,
(6)
where Lo(x, ωo) and Li(x, ωi) are the outgoing and inci-
dent radiance at a surface position x along direction ωo
and ωi, respectively, and n is the normal vector at x.
f(x, ωi, ωo; α, γ, n) is the Bidirectional Reflectance Distri-
bution Function (BRDF) determined by the surface geometry
(normal n) and material properties including albedo α and
roughness γ. Considering the light visibility, the incident
radiance is further formulated as
Li(x, ωi) = V (x, ωi)Li(ωi),
(7)
where V (x, ωi) ∈{0, 1} indicates whether x is visible along
the light direction ωi. The global light Li(ωi) is parametrized
as learnable Spherical Harmonics (SH), which are optimized
during the inverse rendering process.
Based on the physically-based rendering process, we addi-
tionally learn pose-dependent intrinsic maps including normal


JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021
6
N(Θ), albedo A(Θ), and roughness γ(Θ) maps on the front
and back canonical views:
Nf(Θ), Nb(Θ) ←FN (Pf(Θ), Pb(Θ)),
Af(Θ), Ab(Θ) ←FA(Pf(Θ), Pb(Θ)),
γf(Θ), γb(Θ) ←Fγ(Pf(Θ), Pb(Θ)),
(8)
where FN , FA and Fγ are StyleUNet modules. More specif-
ically, the learned normal map N(Θ) is an offset of the
surface normal on the parametric template for better pose
generalization. The light visibility V (x, ωi) can be computed
from the posed 3D Gaussians by point-based ray tracing [20].
However, as mentioned in [20], computing the light visibility
during training is not preferred because of the computational
complexity. Therefore, we train an additional network to
predict light visibility and supervise the prediction by ran-
domly sampling view directions. Specifically, we formulate
the light-direction-dependent visibility as SH, and predict SH
coefficient map K(Θ) using a StyleUNet FK:
Kf(Θ), Kb(Θ) ←FK(Pf(Θ), Pb(Θ)).
(9)
Similar to the Gaussian maps, each pixel value on normal,
albedo, roughness and light visibility maps is associated with
a 3D Gaussian. Following Relightable 3D Gaussian [20], we
sample N incident light directions over the hemisphere space,
and calculate the PBR color of each 3D Gaussian by the
discrete form of Eq. 6:
Lo(µ, ωo) =
X
ωi
Li(µ, ω)f(µ, ωi, ωo; αµ, γµ, nµ)(ωi · nµ)∆ωi,
(10)
where µ is the position of a 3D Gaussian, αµ, γµ and nµ
is the corresponding albedo, roughness and normal attribute.
Finally, the physically-based rendered image can be obtained
by rasterization (Eq. 2).
D. Training
The optimizable parameters of the avatar model include the
parameters of StyleUNets and an environment light map lenv.
Our training loss consists of five parts: the reconstruction loss
Lrecon, PBR loss LPBR, normal loss Lnormal, visibility loss Lvis
and regularization loss Lreg:
L = Lrecon + LPBR + λnormalLnormal + λvisLvis + Lreg.
(11)
1) Reconstruction Loss: The reconstruction loss aims to
learn the geometry and the observed texture of the human
avatar from the multi-view videos without considering the
PBR process. We denote the rendered image using color
attributes from the Gaussian maps as COBS. The reconstruction
loss involves an L1 loss and a perceptual loss [113] between
COBS and the ground-truth image CGT:
Lrecon = L1(COBS, CGT) + λperceptualLperceptual(COBS, CGT).
(12)
2) PBR Loss: The PBR loss aims to disentangle the light
condition and avatar materials from the multi-view observa-
tions. We denote the rendered image by the PBR process (i.e.,
Eq. 10) as CPBR. The PBR loss involves an L1 loss and a
perceptual loss between CPBR and CGT:
LPBR = L1(CPBR, CGT) + λperceptualLperceptual(CPBR, CGT).
(13)
3) Normal Loss: We employ a pretrained normal estimation
network [114] to supervise our predicted normal. Specifically,
we render a normal image with the predicted normal as
additional channels by rasterization, and compare it with the
estimated one by [114] using L1 loss.
4) Visibility Loss: In each iteration, for each 3D Gaussian,
we randomly sample a light direction over the hemisphere
around its normal. We compute L1 loss between the predicted
visibility of the sampled directions and the ground-truth one
obtained by point-based ray tracing [20].
5) Regularization Loss: For the stability and convergence
of avatar training, we design several regularization losses on
the geometry and materials. Specifically, the regularization
losses involve a geometric regularization loss and smooth
regularization losses on albedo and roughness:
Lreg = λgeoLgeo + λalbedoLsmooth(IA) + λroughnessLsmooth(Iγ),
(14)
where Lgeo = ∥∆O∥2
2 restrains the predicted offset map ∆O
from being extremely large, and the smooth loss is a bilateral
smoothness term [20] that constrains the material properties
to change continuously in areas with smooth colors:
Lsmooth(I) = ∥∇I∥exp(−∥∇CGT∥),
(15)
where I is the rendered albedo or roughness map (IA or Iγ)
via splatting-based rasterization.
E. Animation and Relighting
1) Pose Projection Strategy: Benefiting from the effective
avatar representation, our method can reconstruct detailed
human appearances under the training poses. However, given
the inherently data-driven nature of learning-based avatars,
addressing generalization to novel poses is also necessary
and important. RAM-Avatar [115] trains a VAE to transform
the testing pose into an in-distribution one. In this work, we
propose to utilize Principal Component Analysis (PCA) to
project a novel driving pose signal into the distribution of seen
training poses for better generalization. Specifically, given a
pose condition represented by posed position maps, we extract
valid points and concatenate them as a vector xt ∈R3M
(M is the point number). The vector of each training frame
composes a matrix X = [x1, · · · , xT ], where T is the number
of training frames. We perform PCA on X, producing N
principal components S = [s1, · · · , sN] ∈R3M×N and
standard deviation of each component σi. Given position maps
derived by a novel driving pose, we project the corresponding
vector x into the PCA space by
β = S⊤· (x −¯x),
(16)


JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021
7
Fig. 5. Example animatable avatars with high-fidelity dynamic appearances created by our method.
where ¯x is the mean of X. Then we reconstruct the positions
from the low-dimensional coefficient β by
xrecon = S · β + ¯x,
(17)
then we reshape xrecon into a M × 3 tensor, and scatter it
onto the position maps. To constrain the reconstructed position
maps to lie in the distribution of training poses, we clip each
component of β within the bound of [−2σi, 2σi]. Overall,
the pose projection strategy ensures reasonable interpolation
within the distribution of training poses, enabling better gen-
eralization to novel poses as shown in Fig. 14.
2) Relighting: Thanks to the introduction of PBR into
the avatar representation, our method is able to relight the
avatar under novel illumination. Specifically, given a novel
pose, we first feed it into the avatar networks to predict
Gaussian, normal, albedo and roughness maps. Note that we
do not predict light visibility maps during testing because
we empirically find it cannot accurately generalize to novel
poses. We hypothesize the reasons are that the visibility is
heavily determined by global self-occlusions, and the variety
of training poses is limited. To this end, we directly calculate
the visibility of posed 3D Gaussians via point-based ray
tracing [20]. Then, given a novel environment map, we inject
it with the predicted normal, abledo, and roughness as well as
calculated visibility into the PBR equation (Eq. 10) to compute
the PBR color of each 3D Gaussian. Finally, the relit image
is obtained by splatting-based rasterization. As illustrated in
Fig. 7, our method can produce photorealistic animation under
novel illumination.
IV. EXPERIMENTS
A. Results
1) Animation: As shown in Fig. 1 and Fig. 5, our method
can create realistic avatars with high-fidelity dynamic details
from multi-view videos. We also show results animated by
challenging out-of-distribution poses from AMASS dataset
[116] in Fig. 6. Thanks to the effective avatar representation
and pose projection strategy, our method can produce ani-
mation results with highly dynamic, realistic and generalized
appearances.
2) Relighting: In addition to animation, our method extends
support to relighting applications. By naturally incorporat-
ing physically-based inverse rendering techniques into our
powerful avatar representation, we achieve accurate intrinsic
decomposition and vivid relighting results, as demonstrated in
Fig. 1 and Fig. 7.
Please refer to the supplementary video for more sequential
animation and relighting results.
B. Dataset and Metric
We mainly utilize three public datasets for the experiments,
including 3 sequences with 24 views from THuman4.0 dataset
[7], 3 sequences with 16 views from AvatarReX dataset [66]
and 5 sequences with 160 views from ActorsHQ dataset
[117] (we only use 47 full-body views for avatar modeling).
THuman4.0 and AvatarReX datasets also provide the SMPL-
X [110] registrations. We fit SMPL-X for ActorsHQ dataset
using the method proposed by Zhang et al. [118]. We split
each sequence as training and testing chunks, and the training
chunk contains 1500 ∼3000 frames.


JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021
8
Fig. 6. Example sequential animation results by our method. Each row is an animation sequence involving 3 subjects. Our method can generate realistic
and reasonable dynamic details even under novel poses from the AMASS dataset [116].


JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021
9
Albedo
Roughness
Normal
Visibility
Intrinsic Decomposition
Relighting
Synthetic Point Light
Real Environment Map
Fig. 7.
Example intrinsic decomposition and relighting results under novel poses by our method. The first four columns display the decomposition
results of material and geometry. The fifth column showcases the relighting outcomes with a directional point light, whereas the remaining columns are relit
using real environment maps.
We adopt Peak Signal-to-Noise Ratio (PSNR), Structure
Similarity Index Measure (SSIM) [119], Learned Perceptual
Image Patch Similarity (LPIPS) [113] and Fr´echet Inception
Distance (FID) [120] for quantitative experiments. PSNR
and SSIM are computed on the entire image at the original
resolution, while LPIPS and FID are computed on the cropped
minimal square that covers the human body.
C. Implementation Details
1) Template Reconstruction: We optimize an SDF and
color field represented by an MLP consisting of intermediate
layers with (512, 256, 256, 256, 256, 256) neurons. Given a
posed point, we find accurate correspondence in the canonical
space by root finding. Following ARAH [59], we initialize
the correspondence as the canonical position that is computed
by inverse skinning based on blending weights of the closest
SMPL vertex. Different from SNARF [44] and ARAH [59]


JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021
10
Fig. 8. Qualitative comparison with state-of-the-art NeRF-based body-only avatars including TAVA [8], ARAH [59], SLRF [7] and PoseVocab [63]
on novel pose synthesis.
TABLE I
LOSS WEIGHTS IN THE TRAINING PROCESS.
Loss Weight
Value
λperceptual
0.1
λnormal
0.2
λvis
0.1
λgeo
0.01
λalbedo
0.005
λroughness
0.005
that utilize the Broyden’s method [121] to solve Eq. 3, we em-
ploy the Gauss-Newton method by implementing a customized
CUDA kernel. The training loss of template reconstruction
involves an RGB loss, a mask loss and an Eikonal loss [122].
2) Network Architecture: The network in our avatar rep-
resentation is composed of StyleUNet [17], a conditional
StyleGAN-based [14] generator. Differently, we adapt the
original StyleUNet by incorporating two decoders to predict
both front & back Gaussian and intrinsic maps. The resolution
of the input position map is 512 × 512, and the resolution
of the output Gaussian and intrinsic maps is 1024 × 1024.
Specifically, we utilize five different StyleUNets to output
color (3-channel), position (3-channel), other Gaussian at-
tributes (8-channel), albedo & roughness (4-channel) and
normal & visibility (19-channel). The visibility is represented
as 16-dimensional SH coefficients. In the color StyleUNet,
we modulate the color output with a view direction map
to model view-dependent effects. Each pixel on the view
direction map indicates the angle between the view direction
and the template normal. The view direction map is encoded
through a tiny CNN, then the encoded feature map is injected
into an intermediate decoder layer of the color StyleUNet.
TABLE II
QUANTITATIVE COMPARISON WITH STATE-OF-THE-ART NERF-BASED
BODY-ONLY AVATARS.
Method
PSNR ↑
SSIM ↑
LPIPS ↓
FID ↓
Ours
28.0714
0.9739
0.0515
29.4831
PoseVocab [63]
26.3784
0.9707
0.0592
49.4541
SLRF [7]
26.9015
0.9724
0.0600
52.0613
ARAH [59]
22.3004
0.9616
0.1075
90.6077
TAVA [8]
26.8019
0.9705
0.0915
96.3474
3) Training: We adopt the Adam optimizer [123] for train-
ing the network with a learning rate of 5 × 10−4. The loss
weights are set as illustrated in Tab. I. The batch size is 1,
the total iteration number is 500k, and the training procedure
takes about two days on one RTX 4090.
4) Running Time: For only animation, it takes around
0.13 secs to render one frame. Given novel illumination for
relighting, it takes 4 ∼10 secs to synthesize one frame
due to the additional computational cost of light visibility
computation in PBR. The relighting time cost mainly depends
on the numbers of 3D Gaussians and sampled rays.
D. Comparison on Avatar Animation
In the comparisons with state-of-the-art animatable avatars,
we first compare our method with NeRF-based approaches
including both body-only (TAVA [8], ARAH [59], SLRF
[7], PoseVocab [63]) and full-body (AvatarReX [66]) avatars.
Then we compare our method with concurrent 3D Gaussian
splatting-based avatars including 3DGS-Avatar [91] and Gaus-
sianAvatar [95].
