Title: Layga: Layered gaussian avatars for animatable clothing transfer

LayGA: Layered Gaussian Avatars for Animatable Clothing
Transfer
Siyou Lin
Zhe Li
Zhaoqi Su
linsy21@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
liz19@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
suzq13@tsinghua.org.cn
Tsinghua University
Haidian, Beijing, China
Zerong Zheng
NNKosmos Technology
Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China
zrzheng1995@foxmail.com
Hongwen Zhang
Beijing Normal University
Haidian, Beijing, China
zhanghongwen@bnu.edu.cn
Yebin LiuвҲ—
Tsinghua University
Haidian, Beijing, China
Figure 1: Our method can create layered animatable avatars for clothing transfer with realistic garment details. The left shows
four characters wearing the same upper garment, while the right shows four different garments are dressed on the same
character.
ABSTRACT
Animatable clothing transfer, aiming at dressing and animating
garments across characters, is a challenging problem. Most hu-
man avatar works entangle the representations of the human body
and clothing together, which leads to difficulties for virtual try-
on across identities. WhatвҖҷs worse, the entangled representations
usually fail to exactly track the sliding motion of garments. To
overcome these limitations, we present Layered Gaussian Avatars
(LayGA), a new representation that formulates body and clothing
as two separate layers for photorealistic animatable clothing trans-
fer from multi-view videos. Our representation is built upon the
Gaussian map-based avatar for its excellent representation power
of garment details. However, the Gaussian map produces unstruc-
tured 3D Gaussians distributed around the actual surface. The ab-
sence of a smooth explicit surface raises challenges in accurate gar-
ment tracking and collision handling between body and garments.
Therefore, we propose two-stage training involving single-layer
reconstruction and multi-layer fitting. In the single-layer recon-
struction stage, we propose a series of geometric constraints to
вҲ—Corresponding author
reconstruct smooth surfaces and simultaneously obtain the seg-
mentation between body and clothing. Next, in the multi-layer
fitting stage, we train two separate models to represent body and
clothing and utilize the reconstructed clothing geometries as 3D
supervision for more accurate garment tracking. Furthermore, we
propose geometry and rendering layers for both high-quality geo-
metric reconstruction and high-fidelity rendering. Overall, the pro-
posed LayGA realizes photorealistic animations and virtual try-
on, and outperforms other baseline methods. Our project page is
https://jsnln.github.io/layga/index.html.
CCS CONCEPTS
вҖў Computing methodologies вҶ’Shape modeling.
KEYWORDS
Animatable avatar, clothing transfer, human reconstruction
arXiv:2405.07319v1  [cs.CV]  12 May 2024


Lin, S. et al
1
INTRODUCTION
Photorealistic human avatars have drawn considerable attention
with recent advances in rendering techniques, which aim to cre-
ate a photo-realistic virtual digital embodiment of a clothed hu-
man. While Neural Radiance Fields (NeRFs) [Mildenhall et al. 2020]
have previously dominated the area of photo-realistic avatar cre-
ation [Feng et al. 2022; Guo et al. 2023; Jiang et al. 2023, 2022; Li
et al. 2022, 2023; Peng et al. 2022, 2024; Su et al. 2021; Te et al.
2022; Wang et al. 2022; Weng et al. 2022; Zheng et al. 2022, 2023],
the NeRF-based avatar methods still face a challenge in accurately
representing high-frequency human dynamics. Additionally, the
rendering speed for NeRF is relatively slow. There is an ongoing
trend to replace NeRFs with the recently proposed 3D Gaussian
Splatting (3DGS) [Kerbl et al. 2023] in human avatars [Hu and Liu
2024; Kocabas et al. 2024; Li et al. 2024b; Pang et al. 2024; Zielonka
et al. 2023]. 3DGS, being both differentiable and highly efficient,
has become the new go-to representation for photorealistic novel-
view synthesis. However, most existing works that apply NeRF or
3DGS to clothed humans consider body and clothing as a unified
single layer. Albeit adequate for most cases, this formulation en-
counters challenges in modeling sliding motions between different
garment layers, and cannot accommodate certain applications such
as clothing transfer.
Compared with single-layer representations, multi-layer mod-
eling allows more accurate tracking of the sliding movement of
clothing boundaries [Xiang et al. 2021; Yu et al. 2019]. Furthermore,
layered modeling also enables new applications such as virtual
try-on by transferring the clothing of one character to the body
of another [Pons-Moll et al. 2017]. However, there are few NeRF
or 3DGS works that support the modeling of multi-layer human
avatars. SCARF [Feng et al. 2022] and DELTA [Feng et al. 2023]
propose to combine NeRF-based clothing and mesh-based body,
which are capable of representing different geometric properties of
clothing and body layers and support clothing transfer. However,
the rendering quality and garment dynamics do not fully meet the
desired level, which may be attributed to NeRFвҖҷs limited capability
for thin-layered clothing.
In this work, we propose Layered Gaussian Avatars (LayGA),
which model animatable multi-layered clothed humans using Gauss-
ian splats, seamlessly integrating state-of-the-art 3DGS-based hu-
man avatars with the ability for clothing transfer. 3DGS is chosen for
its advantages in high-fidelity and efficient rendering. The explicit
representation provides a clearer depiction of geometric details
in thin-layered clothing compared to NeRF. Our layered avatar
representation is built upon the Gaussian map-based avatar [Li
et al. 2024b], which learns pose-dependent 3D Gaussians on the 2D
domain, because of its ability of modeling high-frequency clothing
dynamics. However, naively learning two sets of Gaussians to sepa-
rately represent body and clothing is infeasible. First, 3D Gaussians
optimized through differentiable rendering without any constraints
are typically unevenly distributed around the actual human surface.
Consequently, they fail to provide an explicit and smooth geometric
surface for modeling the body-cloth relations, which is essential
for adapting clothing to different body shapes and collision han-
dling. Secondly, while parametric body models like SMPL [Loper
et al. 2015]/SMPL-X [Pavlakos et al. 2019] can be employed for the
body part as a prior, the appearance of the clothing template is not
predetermined in advance. Concurrent work D3GA [Zielonka et al.
2023] proposes a multi-layer human avatar representation using 3D
Gaussian Splatting. However, the synthesized avatar is blurry due
to the limited capability of their MLP-based representation, and it
currently lacks support for clothing transfer.
To overcome the above challenges, we propose two-stage train-
ing involving single-layer reconstruction and multi-layer fitting.
In the single-layer reconstruction stage (Sec. 3.2), we introduce a
series of geometrical constraints to force the 3D Gaussians to lie on
a smooth surface, thus providing explicit geometries for collision
handling in the following layered modeling. Besides, we learn a
segmentation label channel to separate the clothing from the uni-
fied 3D Gaussians. In the next multi-layer fitting stage (Sec. 3.3),
we train two separate models to represent the body and clothing.
The previously reconstructed clothing geometry serves as a 3D
proxy for more accurate tracking of clothing motion. Moreover, we
propose an additional rendering layer to guarantee both smooth
reconstruction and high-fidelity rendering, since smooth surfaces
obtained by the proposed geometric constraints may degenerate
the rendering quality. Overall, once the training stages finish, our
layered model is able to not only generate realistic animation under
novel poses, but also transfer the clothing across identities.
To summarize, our contributions include:
вҖў We propose layered Gaussian Avatars (LayGA), the first
3DGS-based layered human avatar representation for ani-
matable clothing transfer.
вҖў We introduce geometric constraints on 3D Gaussians for
smooth surface reconstruction, supporting collision han-
dling between the body and clothing in the layered repre-
sentation.
вҖў In the multi-layer learning, we introduce previously seg-
mented reconstruction as supervisions for more accurate
tracking of clothing boundaries. We additionally introduce
a rendering layer to alleviate the deterioration of rendering
quality brought by geometric constraints.
2
RELATED WORK
2.1
Integrated Modeling of Clothed Human
Avatars
Human avatar aims to formulate realistic pose-dependent human
and clothing motions under novel poses. Most human avatars model
clothing and the body as a whole. Traditional mesh-based human
avatars [Burov et al. 2021; Habermann et al. 2023, 2021; Ma et al.
2020; Palafox et al. 2021; Saito et al. 2021] formulate human avatar
with a single fixed-topology human mesh, aims to explicitly repre-
sent the pose-dependent human geometry as a deformation field
over the mesh vertices. However, these methods rely on a pre-
defined human mesh, which can hardly represent complicated
clothing topologies or detailed pose-dependent geometry and tex-
ture. Recently, to represent more flexible geometry and garment
movements, controllable human avatars mainly rely on point-based
or Neural Radiance Field [Mildenhall et al. 2020] (NeRF)-based
methods. For point-based methods, POP [Ma et al. 2021] maps
the semantic human point cloud onto the SMPL UV space and


LayGA: Layered Gaussian Avatars for Animatable Clothing Transfer
Figure 2: Overview of our pipeline. Our pipeline consists of two training stages: 1) single-layer reconstruction and segmentation;
2) Multi-layer fitting.
learns the pose-dependent UV features for human avatar anima-
tion. Furthermore, FITE [Lin et al. 2022] and CloSET [Zhang et al.
2023] are proposed to flexibly learn the point-cloud template for
humans under loose garments. DPF [Prokudin et al. 2023] solves an
as-isometric-as-possible deformation field for better representing
complicated garment motions. Although these methods can be ap-
plied to various garment types and motions, point-based methods
face limitations when applied to RGB-based inputs due to their lack
of textual information.
As an implicit neural rendering technique with dense geometry
and texture field, NeRF-based human avatars [Hu et al. 2023; Jiang
et al. 2023; Li et al. 2022, 2023; Liu et al. 2021; Peng et al. 2022,
2021a,b; Su et al. 2021; Weng et al. 2022; Xu et al. 2021; Zheng
et al. 2022, 2023] are capable of learning view-dependent textual
details from multi-view or monocular RGB inputs. To model better
dynamics, AnimatableNeRF [Peng et al. 2021a] defines a NeRF
deformation field over the canonical SMPL [Loper et al. 2015];
SLRF [Zheng et al. 2022] defines local NeRF fields on the sampled
human nodes; PoseVocab [Li et al. 2023] employs a pose vocabulary
for encoding high-frequency local dynamic details. Efficiency-wise,
InstantAvatar [Jiang et al. 2023] achieves one-minute training for
an avatar from a monocular human video. Although these methods
achieve plausible quality, NeRF-based methods still lead to over-
smooth results especially on high-frequency textual regions, due
to the low-frequency bias of MLPs. Besides, their rendering speed
is relatively slow due to dense sampling.
Gaussians are another popular choice for representing humans.
Early works have adopted Gaussians associated to skeletons for
human/hand pose tracking [Rhodin et al. 2016, 2015; Sridhar et al.
2015, 2014; Stoll et al. 2011], but do not attempt to modeling photo-
realistic appearance. Recently, with the emergence of 3D Gaussian
Splatting (3DGS) [Kerbl et al. 2023], which achieves SOTA rendering
speed and quality, Gaussian-based representations become the new
go-to choice for high-quality rendering of human avatars [Kocabas
et al. 2024; Li et al. 2024b; Moreau et al. 2024; Pang et al. 2024; Ye et al.
2023]. 3D Gaussian Splatting combines the advantages of explicit
point-based modeling for efficiently representing flexible geometry,
and the neural rendering technique for learning pose-dependent
textual information from RGB inputs like NeRF. With the StyleUNet-
encoded Gaussian parameter learning technique and self-adaptive
template learning, AnimatableGaussians [Li et al. 2024b] achieves
highly dynamic, realistic and generalized details for human avatar
animation. However, the above methods all model the human and
clothing as a whole, which hinders their applicability to specific
use cases, including but not limited to clothing transfer.
2.2
Layered Modeling of Clothed Human
Avatars
To better represent garment properties on top of the human bodies
and apply to garment transfer or editing, some researchers propose
disentangled human avatars, which model garments as separate
layers. Traditional layered-based clothed human avatars are mesh-
based methods. Some methods leverage a dense multi-view capture
system to reconstruct high-quality human and garment meshes
with temporal consistency, and learn pose-dependent human and
garment texture maps for clothed avatar animation [Bagautdinov
et al. 2021; Xiang et al. 2022, 2021]. CaPhy [Su et al. 2023] learns
garment dynamics from clothed human scans and unsupervised
physical energies. DiffAvatar [Li et al. 2024a] constructs a human
avatar from a single scan, which jointly solves the 2D clothing pat-
tern, clothing material properties and human shape, and performs
physical-based human avatar driving. These methods either rely
on expensive capture systems [Bagautdinov et al. 2021; Xiang et al.
2022, 2021] or can hardly learn pose-dependent garment texture
and geometry from RGB inputs [Li et al. 2024a; Su et al. 2023].
Recently, a few works focus on layered modeling of clothed hu-
man avatars with NeRF [Mildenhall et al. 2020] or mesh surfaces
to learn garment properties from RGB inputs. SCARF [Feng et al.
2022] and DELTA [Feng et al. 2023] combine implicit NeRF-based
garment and explicit mesh-based body modeling to better represent
each individual part. GALA [Kim et al. 2024] adopts DMTet [Shen
et al. 2021] to represent different layers of clothed humans but
focuses on generation conditioned on a single scan. While these
methods enables clothing transfer to different bodies, the recon-
structed garment texture still lacks high-frequency and dynamic
details. Concurrent work D3GA [Zielonka et al. 2023] uses Gaussian
Splatting for modeling layered humans but do not focus on garment
transfer.
3
METHOD
Our model is a pose-conditioned generator of layered 3D Gaus-
sians that produces photorealistic animations of human avatars and
enables clothing transfer across identities. Fig. 2 shows our main
pipeline. Given a body pose, we first convert it into a position map
as the pose condition, and then use a StyleUNet-based [Wang et al.
2023] model to predict pose-dependent 3D Gaussians. These 3D


Lin, S. et al
Figure 3: Illustration of the clothing-aware avatar represen-
tation.
Gaussians are non-rigidly deformed from a SMPL-X [Pavlakos et al.
2019] template in the canonical space, posed using linear blend
skinning (LBS), and subsequently rendered to the given view by
3DGS [Kerbl et al. 2023]. We empirically find that pure photometric
cues are insufficient for tracking garments motions, so we propose
to divide the training procedure into two stages: (i) single-layer
reconstruction and segmentation; (ii) multi-layer fitting.
In the single-layer reconstruction stage, we obtain segmented re-
construction by employing our proposed geometric constraints and
using garment mask supervision [Li et al. 2020]. In the multi-layer
fitting stage, we train two layers of Gaussians (body and clothing)1
using previously obtained segmented geometries. Once trained, our
model not only generates photorealistic avatar animations, but also
enables clothing transfer across different characters.
3.1
Clothing-aware Avatar Representation
As illustrated in Fig. 3, our model is built upon a recent state-of-
the-art 3DGS avatar representation, Animatable Gaussians [Li et al.
2024b], which predicts pose-dependent Gaussian maps in the 2D
domain for modeling higher-fidelity human dynamics. Our clothing-
aware model adopts a similar architecture with Li et al. [2024b] but
introduces modifications tailored to our layered modeling.
Given a body pose рқңғrepresented as the SMPL-X joint angles,
we first convert it to a position map рқ‘Җpos вҲҲRрқҗ»Г—рқ‘ҠГ—6 as a condi-
tioning signal (front and back maps concatenated channel-wise,
with рқҗ»= рқ‘Ҡ= 512). The position map is obtained by rendering
the canonical SMPL-X model to the front and back views, with
vertices colored using the posed coordinates. As demonstrated
in [Li et al. 2024b], such a 2D parameterization allows us to uti-
lize powerful 2D convolutional networks (CNN), e.g., StyleUNet
[Wang et al. 2023], to predict Gaussian parameters for modeling
higher-fidelity appearances. The position map рқ‘Җpos is then fed to a
StyleUNet-based model to generate front and back Gaussian maps
рқ‘Җfg, рқ‘Җbg вҲҲRрқҗ»Г—рқ‘ҠГ—рқҗ¶, where рқҗ¶= 16. Different from the method of
Li et al. [2024b] that only predicts Gaussian parameters including
color (3-dim), offset/position (3-dim), opacity (1-dim) and covari-
ance (7-dim), our clothing-aware model additionally learns a label,
1In our current setting, we only consider upper clothes as the clothing part. However,
the formulation can be extended to any outmost-layer garment(s).
represented as the probability that each 3D Gaussian belongs to
body or clothing.
Given the predicted Gaussian maps рқ‘Җfg and рқ‘Җbg, we can extract
3D Gaussians inside the template mask. Let us denote the Gaussian
parameters of each 3D Gaussian as: color рқ‘җрқ‘–вҲҲR3, position offset
from SMPL О”ВҜрқ‘Ҙрқ‘–вҲҲR3, opacity рқ‘ңрқ‘–вҲҲR, scales ВҜрқ‘ рқ‘–вҲҲR3, rotations
ВҜрқ‘һрқ‘–вҲҲR4 and probabilities рқ‘қcloth
рқ‘–
and рқ‘қbody
рқ‘–
(normalized by softmax).
Here, the superscript bar in О”ВҜрқ‘Ҙрқ‘–ВҜрқ‘ рқ‘–and ВҜрқ‘һрқ‘–means these predictions
are defined in the canonical space. Let ВҜрқ‘Ҙsmpl
рқ‘–
denote the point on
SMPL corresponding to pixel рқ‘–. Then the mean and covariance of
the 3D Gaussian are formulated as
ВҜрқ‘Ҙрқ‘–
=
ВҜрқ‘Ҙsmpl
рқ‘–
+ О”ВҜрқ‘Ҙрқ‘–,
(1)
рқ‘Ҙрқ‘–
=
рқ‘…рқ‘–(рқңғ) ВҜрқ‘Ҙрқ‘–+ рқ‘Ўрқ‘–(рқңғ),
(2)
ОЈрқ‘–
=
рқ‘…рқ‘–(рқңғ) ВҜОЈрқ‘–рқ‘…рқ‘–(рқңғ)рқ‘Ү.
(3)
Here, рқ‘…(рқңғ) and рқ‘Ў(рқңғ) represent the LBS transformation given the
driving pose рқңғ, and ВҜОЈрқ‘–is the covariance matrix in the canonical
space derived from ВҜрқ‘ рқ‘–and ВҜрқ‘һрқ‘–. The posed 3D Gaussians are eventually
rendered to an image using the 3DGS renderer [Kerbl et al. 2023].
3.2
Single-Layer Modeling with Geometric
Constraints
In the single-layer reconstruction stage, our goal is to train a model
that produces 3D Gaussians smoothly distributed on the actual geo-
metric surface of the captured human, and simultaneously obtain
the segmentation between body and clothing.
3.2.1
Geometric Constraints for Reconstruction. As the vanilla 3DGS
does not involve any geometric constraints in the training proce-
dure, the resulting 3D Gaussians will not converge to a smooth
surface but are disorderly scattered around the actual surface. The
reconstructed surfaces of clothed humans are desired to be continu-
ous and smooth, with garment details and clear clothing boundaries.
Our key observation is that in our representation the 3D Gaussians
correspond to evenly space pixels on a 2D map, so we can conve-
niently constrain the underlying geometry using the neighborhood
of each pixel. Specifically, we additionally introduce the following
geometric constraints for regularization and detail enhancement.
Image-based Normal Loss. A main difficulty for multi-view re-
construction using differentiable rendering is the shape-radiance
ambiguity, i.e., a wrongly reconstructed geometry may produce
correct rendering for training views. To solve the ambiguity, we
propose to use normals estimated from images as an additional
supervision signal. Fortunately, recent works allow normals to be
relatively accurately estimated for clothed humans [Saito et al. 2020;
Xiu et al. 2023]. We derive normals from our model by utilizing
image pixel neighbors. As shown in Fig. 4, for each pixel рқ‘–, we use
the triangles formed by рқ‘–and its neighbors to compute its normals.
As an example, suppose the neighbors of рқ‘–are рқ‘—,рқ‘ҳ,рқ‘ҷ,рқ‘ҡ(arranged
counter-clockwise). Then the normal рқ‘ӣрқ‘–on this pixel is:
рқ‘ӣрқ‘–
=
рқ‘…рқ‘–(рқңғ) ВҜрқ‘ӣрқ‘–/вҲҘрқ‘…рқ‘–(рқңғ) ВҜрқ‘ӣрқ‘–вҲҘ2,
ВҜрқ‘ӣрқ‘–= ЛҶрқ‘ӣрқ‘–/вҲҘЛҶрқ‘ӣрқ‘–вҲҘ2,
(4)
ЛҶрқ‘ӣрқ‘–
=
( ВҜрқ‘Ҙрқ‘—вҲ’ВҜрқ‘Ҙрқ‘–) Г— ( ВҜрқ‘Ҙрқ‘ҳвҲ’ВҜрқ‘Ҙрқ‘–) + ( ВҜрқ‘Ҙрқ‘ҳвҲ’ВҜрқ‘Ҙрқ‘–) Г— ( ВҜрқ‘Ҙрқ‘ҷвҲ’ВҜрқ‘Ҙрқ‘–)
+( ВҜрқ‘Ҙрқ‘ҷвҲ’ВҜрқ‘Ҙрқ‘–) Г— ( ВҜрқ‘Ҙрқ‘ҡвҲ’ВҜрқ‘Ҙрқ‘–) + ( ВҜрқ‘Ҙрқ‘ҡвҲ’ВҜрқ‘Ҙрқ‘–) Г— ( ВҜрқ‘Ҙрқ‘—вҲ’ВҜрқ‘Ҙрқ‘–).
(5)


LayGA: Layered Gaussian Avatars for Animatable Clothing Transfer
Figure 4: Illustration of normal computation on the Gaussian
map.
When computing the normals, we only take account of pixels whose
neighbors are all inside the template mask. The normals are ren-
dered as additional channels by rasterization, and compared with
the predicted ones from color images. The normal loss Lnormal is
the рқҗҝ1 loss between the estimated normal image and the rendered
normal image (averaged over all pixels).
Stitching Loss. Since the 3D Gaussians are parameterized on two
separate maps (front and back), we introduce Lstitch, an рқҗҝ2 loss be-
tween the boundary pixels in the front map with their counterparts
in the back map to prevent discontinuity.
Regularization. In addition to normal supervision, we also uti-
lize the following geometric regularization losses to penalize large
distortions and make the model favor small-deformation solutions.
Following [Li et al. 2024b], we penalize large offsets by adding an
offset regularization loss Loff =
1
рқ‘Ғ
ГҚ
рқ‘–вҲҘО”ВҜрқ‘Ҙрқ‘–вҲҘ2
2. We also use a to-
tal variational (TV) loss LTV, which is defined as the averaged рқҗҝ2
loss on the positional differences of all neighboring pixels. This
constrains the positions of two neighboring pixels to remain close,
penalizing a scattered distribution of the 3D Gaussians. Following
Pons-Moll et al. [2017], we regularize the edge lengths between the
base SMPL-X model and the deformed one using an edge regulariza-
tion loss Ledge. Here, an edge is defined between two neighboring
valid pixels. Ledge is the averaged рқҗҝ2 loss on the differences be-
tween the lengths of an edge before and after adding the offset.
These losses are summed up as the regularization term:
Lreg = рқңҶoffLoff + рқңҶTVLTV + рқңҶedgeLedge.
Eventually, the geometric loss functions are formulated as
Lgeom = рқңҶnormalLnormal + рқңҶstitchLstitch + Lreg.
(6)
3.2.2
Clothing Segmentation. During the single-layer reconstruc-
tion stage, we also aim to obtain segmentation between body and
clothing. Recall that we predict probabilities рқ‘қbody
рқ‘–
and рқ‘қcloth
рқ‘–
(nor-
malized by softmax) whether a given Gaussian is body or clothing.
We also render these two values as additional channels using the
3DGS renderer. This gives a rendered segmentation image рқ‘Ҷ(2 chan-
nels, рқ‘Ҷbody and рқ‘Ҷcloth). The label loss Llabel is the cross entropy loss
between the rendered segmentation image рқ‘Ҷand the ground truth
segmentation рқ‘Ҷgt:
Llabel
=
вҲ’
1
рқ‘Ғbody
вҲ‘пёҒ
рқ‘–
log(рқ‘Ҷbody
рқ‘–
) вҲ’
1
рқ‘Ғcloth
вҲ‘пёҒ
рқ‘–вҖІ
log(рқ‘Ҷcloth
рқ‘–вҖІ
)
вҲ’1
рқ‘Ғbg
вҲ‘пёҒ
рқ‘–вҖІвҖІ
log(1 вҲ’рқ‘Ҷbody
рқ‘–вҖІвҖІ
вҲ’рқ‘Ҷcloth
рқ‘–вҖІвҖІ
).
(7)
Figure 5: Illustration of geometric and rendering layers. рқң–is
the threshold for handling collisions.
Here, рқ‘–ranges over all pixels in рқ‘Ҷgt that are segmented as body, рқ‘–вҖІ
ranges over pixels segmented as clothing, and рқ‘–вҖІвҖІ ranges over all
background pixels. рқ‘Ғbody, рқ‘Ғcloth and рқ‘Ғbg denote the number of
pixels of the corresponding type. рқ‘Ҷgt is obtained by considering
both SCHP [Li et al. 2020] masks and the matting masks that come
with the dataset. The details can be found in the supplementary
document. Furthermore, similar to geometric constraints, we also
apply an рқҗҝ1 TV loss Llabel
TV
on the predicted Gaussian label map,
and a stitching loss Llabel
stitch on the labels of boundary pixels. The
segmentation loss functional is:
Lseg = рқңҶlabelLlabel + рқңҶlabel
TV Llabel
TV
+ рқңҶlabel
stitchLlabel
stitch.
(8)
The rendering loss function includes an рқҗҝ1 loss, an SSIM [Wang
et al. 2004] loss and a perceptual [Zhang et al. 2018] loss on the
rendered RGB images:
Lrender = рқңҶL1LL1 + рқңҶssimLssim + рқңҶlpipsLlpips.
(9)
The final loss function is the sum of all three parts:
L = Lrender + Lgeom + Lseg.
(10)
After training, we can obtain high-quality reconstruction and seg-
mentation of body and clothing as shown in Fig. 2.
3.3
Avatar Fitting with Multi-Layer Gaussian
The goal of the multi-layer modeling stage is to use the segmented
geometry from the single-layer stage to build a two-layer avatar.
Recall that the single-layer stage assigns a body-or-clothing label
to each Gaussian. We use the labels from the first frame of each
sequence (assumed to be an A-pose) to specify a subset of Gaussians
that is labeled as clothing. The criterion for classifying a Gaussian
as clothing is рқ‘қcloth > 0.5, and all other Gaussians are classified as
body. This subset will be used as a template for the clothing part,
while the body part is still defined with SMPL-X.
In this stage, we train two separate models, one for body and
the other for clothing. The two models use the same network ar-
chitectures but different network weights, and the clothing model
will only output the clothing subset specified above. The model
architecture remains mostly the same as the single-layer stage, but
we propose the following modifications for both reconstruction
and rendering quality.


Lin, S. et al
3.3.1
Separating Geometry and Rendering Layers. As described in
Sec. 3.2, geometric constraints force the 3D Gaussians to converge
to a smooth surface. However, we empirically found that these
geometric constraints negatively impacted the rendering quality
of 3DGS, possibly because these geometric constraints lower the
flexibility of Gaussians to model high-fidelity appearance. To pre-
vent the adverse impact brought by geometric constraints, while
still preserving a smooth geometry for collision handling in cloth-
ing transfer, we propose to separate the geometry layer and the
rendering layer. As shown in Fig. 5, in addition to О”ВҜрқ‘Ҙрқ‘–, we add a
second offset О”ВҜрқ‘Ұрқ‘–. The Gaussian positions with only the first off-
set computed as in Eq. (2) are referred to as the geometric layer,
which is smoothly distributed on the actual surface and normals
are available. While the Gaussian positions with additional offset
рқ‘Ұрқ‘–= рқ‘…рқ‘–(рқңғ)( ВҜрқ‘Ҙsmpl
рқ‘–
+ О”ВҜрқ‘Ҙрқ‘–+ О”ВҜрқ‘Ұрқ‘–) + рқ‘Ўрқ‘–(рқңғ)
(11)
are referred to as the rendering layer, which will be used for final
rendering in this stage. To constrain the body layer lies beneath
the clothing one, we employ a collision loss between the body
geometric layer and the clothing geometric layer:
Lcoll =
1
рқ‘Ғcloth
вҲ‘пёҒ
рқ‘–
max(рқң–вҲ’рқ‘‘рқ‘–, 0)2,
(12)
where рқ‘‘рқ‘–= ( ВҜрқ‘Ҙcloth
рқ‘–
вҲ’ВҜрқ‘Ҙbody
рқ‘–
) В· ВҜрқ‘ӣbody
рқ‘–
, рқң–is a distance threshold and
рқ‘–ranges over all valid pixels in the clothing Gaussian map. Note
that simply handling collision between the body geometric layer
and the clothing geometric layer does not ensure their correspond-
ing rendering layers are separate. We therefore also constrain the
rendering layer to stay close to the geometric layer:
Llayer
=
1
рқ‘Ғbody
вҲ‘пёҒ
рқ‘–
max(вҲҘО”ВҜрқ‘Ұbody
рқ‘–
вҲҘ2 вҲ’рқң–/2, 0)2
+
1
рқ‘Ғcloth
вҲ‘пёҒ
рқ‘–вҖІ
max(вҲҘО”ВҜрқ‘Ұcloth
рқ‘–вҖІ
вҲҘ2 вҲ’рқң–/2, 0)2.
(13)
Intuitively, Lcoll encourages the clothing geometric layer and the
body geometric layers to be at least рқң–apart while Lcloth encourages
the rendering layers to be at most рқң–/2 apart from their correspond-
ing geometric layers. Consequently, the two losses together pull
both rendering layers apart to avoid collisions.
3.3.2
Geometric Supervision from Reconstructions. Recall that in
the single-layer stage, we can already obtain segmented point clouds
of clothing for each frame. Since using only image supervision to
track the clothing boundaries is difficult, we directly supervise
the clothing movement in this stage by enforcing a Chamfer dis-
tance loss between the clothing geometric layer and the segmented
clothing reconstruction:
Lcd = ChamferDist({рқ‘Ҙcloth
рқ‘–
}рқ‘–, {рқ‘Ҙrecon
рқ‘–
}рқ‘–),
(14)
where {рқ‘Ҙcloth
рқ‘–
}рқ‘–denotes the point cloud of the clothing geometric
layer, and {рқ‘Ҙrecon
рқ‘–
}рқ‘–is the point cloud reconstructed from the first
single-layer stage.
3.3.3
Segmentation Loss. Since we use a fixed point set to represent
clothing in this stage, we do not predict Gaussian labels рқ‘қbody
рқ‘–
and рқ‘қcloth
рқ‘–
. Instead, they are fixed as (рқ‘қbody
рқ‘–
, рқ‘қcloth
рқ‘–
) = (1, 0) and
(рқ‘қbody
рқ‘–
, рқ‘қcloth
рқ‘–
) = (0, 1) for each Gaussian associated to the body
and the clothing, respectively. Only Llabel in Lseg is preserved in
this stage. We maintain the segmentation loss to avoid ambiguity,
otherwise, if the clothing is optimized to be transparent, the body
will take the colors of the clothing.
Finally, the total training loss in this stage is:
L = Lrender+Lgeom+рқңҶlabelLlabel+рқңҶcollLcoll+рқңҶlayerLlayer+рқңҶcdLcd.
(15)
3.4
Animatable Clothing Transfer and Collision
Handling
Once the training of both stages finishes, we obtain two models
(body and clothing) for each captured subject. At test time, we can
animate the subject using a novel pose sequence. Unfortunately,
despite the effort during training to avoid collision, results are not
guaranteed to be collision-free for novel poses, especially if we
want to dress a garment on a new body shape. To resolve collision,
we propose an additional Laplacian-based post-processing step.
Given a novel pose рқңғand two trained layered models2 Fрқҗҙ=
(F cloth
рқҗҙ
, F body
рқҗҙ
) and Fрқҗө= (F cloth
рқҗө
, F body
рқҗө
), suppose we want to
transfer the clothing of рқҗҙto рқҗө. Let us denote the posed positions
of garment Gaussians (the geometric layer) outputted by F cloth
рқҗҙ
by
рқ‘Ҙcloth
рқҗҙ
вҲҲRрқ‘Ғcloth
рқҗҙ
Г—3, and respectively, the posed body Gaussian posi-
tions and normals of F body
рқҗө
by рқ‘Ҙрқҗө, рқ‘ӣbody
рқҗө
вҲҲRрқ‘Ғbody
рқҗө
Г—3. We attempt
to resolve the collisions that happens between рқ‘Ҙcloth
рқҗҙ
and рқ‘Ҙbody
рқҗө
.
The basic idea is to pull рқ‘Ҙcloth
рқҗҙ
away from рқ‘Ҙbody
рқҗө
along рқ‘ӣрқҗөbut
keeping its graph Laplacian invariant. Let рқҗҝcloth
рқҗҙ
denotes the graph
Laplacian of рқ‘Ҙcloth
рқҗҙ
and рқ‘Ҹ= рқҗҝcloth
рқҗҙ
рқ‘Ҙcloth
рқҗҙ
their Laplacian coordinates.
Here, we consider two points in рқ‘Ҙcloth
рқҗҙ
as neighbors if they are
neighbors in the Gaussian maps, or if they are a pair of pixels in
the front and back Gaussian maps that should be stitched together.
Note that since рқҗҙand рқҗөmay correspond to different body shapes,
рқ‘Ҙcloth
рқҗҙ
, рқ‘Ҙbody
рқҗө
may severely collide with each other. To provide a
collision-free initial guess of new positions of рқ‘Ҙcloth
рқҗҙ
, we compute:
ВҜрқңү= ( ВҜрқ‘Ҙcloth
рқҗҙ
вҲ’рқ‘Ҳcloth
рқҗҙ
ВҜрқ‘Ҙbody
рқҗҙ
) + рқ‘Ҳcloth
рқҗҙ
ВҜрқ‘Ҙbody
рқҗө
.
(16)
Here, рқ‘Ҳcloth
рқҗҙ
is a mask matrix that selects the subset of garment
Gaussians as described in the beginning of Sec. 3.3. In other words,
ВҜрқңүis the canonical-space point cloud deformed from body B, with
the relative displacements of рқ‘Ҙcloth
рқҗҙ
w.r.t. рқ‘Ҙbody
рқҗҙ
. We then apply LBS
with the joint transformations of рқҗөto pose ВҜрқңүas рқңү. We then solve
(in the least squares sense)
пЈ®пЈҜпЈҜпЈҜпЈҜпЈ°
рқҗҝcloth
рқҗҙ
рқӣјрқҗј
рқӣјрқҗј
пЈ№пЈәпЈәпЈәпЈәпЈ»
рқңӮ=
пЈ®пЈҜпЈҜпЈҜпЈҜпЈ°
рқ‘Ҹ
рқӣјрқ‘Ҙcloth
рқҗҙ
рқӣјрқңү
пЈ№пЈәпЈәпЈәпЈәпЈ»
.
(17)
In plain words, the solutionрқңӮtries to keep the Laplacian coordinates
invariant, while remaining close to the original points рқ‘Ҙcloth
рқҗҙ
and
the collision-free initial guess рқңү.
We now update the current value of рқ‘Ҙcloth
рқҗҙ
to рқңӮ. Note that рқ‘Ҙcloth
рқҗҙ
is still not yet collision-free with рқ‘Ҙbody
рқҗө
. To further refine the results,
2 Fcloth
рқҗҙ
denotes the submodel of Fрқҗҙthat outputs the clothing related Gaussians. Other
notations are defined similarly.


LayGA: Layered Gaussian Avatars for Animatable Clothing Transfer
Figure 6: Our method enables animatable clothing transfer, and each row illustrates animation results with the same upper
garment but different identities.
Figure 7: Geometric reconstruction results of the baseline
method (a) and our method (b). Each Gaussian is shaded by its
normal and rendered as a point. Our method exhibits better
reconstruction quality, validating the effectiveness of our
proposed geometric constraints.
for each point in рқ‘Ҙcloth
рқҗҙ
, we find its nearest neighbor in ВҜрқ‘Ҙbody
рқҗө
. Let
these nearest neighbors and their normals be denoted by рқ‘Ҙbody,nn
рқҗө
and рқ‘ӣbody,nn
рқҗө
. We compute the distance from рқ‘Ҙcloth
рқҗҙ
to рқ‘Ҙbody,nn
рқҗө
as
рқ‘‘cloth2body = (рқ‘Ҙcloth
рқҗҙ
вҲ’рқ‘Ҙbody,nn
рқҗө
) В· рқ‘ӣbody,nn
рқҗө
вҲҲRрқ‘Ғcloth
рқҗҙ
.
(18)
The dot denotes point-wise inner product. We then set
рқңү= рқ‘Ҙcloth
рқҗҙ
+ clip(рқң–вҲ’рқ‘‘cloth2body)|max=рқӣҝ
min=0 вҠҷВҜрқ‘ӣbody
рқ‘–
.
(19)
Here, вҠҷmeans point-wise scalar-vector multiplication. Another
Laplacian system is solved (in the least squares sense) to obtain
update рқ‘Ҙcloth
рқҗҙ
:

рқҗҝcloth
рқҗҙ
рқӣјрқҗј

рқңӮ=
 рқ‘Ҹ
рқӣјрқңү

.
(20)
In plain words, we first find a new guess рқңүby moving рқ‘Ҙcloth
рқҗҙ
away
from рқ‘Ҙbody,nn
рқҗө
along the normals, but during each update, the mov-
ing distance is limited by рқӣҝand рқң–вҲ’рқ‘‘cloth2body. The updated рқ‘Ҙcloth
рқҗҙ
is then obtained by solving a Laplacian system involving рқңү. This
process is repeated five times.
After рқ‘Ҙcloth
рқҗҙ
has been optimized as above, its corresponding ren-
dering layer is obtained by adding the posed offsets of О”ВҜрқ‘Ұcloth
рқҗҙ
.
This will be used for the final rendering. We remark that collision
handling is only used at test time.
Table 1: Quantitative evluation of rendering quality.
Subject
Method
PSNRвҶ‘
SSIMвҶ‘
LPIPSвҶ“
FIDвҶ“
A02
Li et al. [2024b]
28.2567
0.9603
0.0396
25.3897
Ours
28.5727
0.9630
0.0380
26.1757
A05
Li et al. [2024b]
28.8049
0.9595
0.0430
33.4961
Ours
27.3584
0.9478
0.0503
39.3849
A08
Li et al. [2024b]
29.0913
0.9565
0.0377
22.0500
Ours
29.2883
0.9583
0.0367
21.4906
4
EXPERIMENTS
In this section we present our main results on geometric reconstruc-
tion and animated clothing transfer. Due to page limits, please refer
to our supplementary document and video for extended evaluations
and discussions.
4.1
Dataset and Training
We train our model on sequences from two datasets: one sequence
from the AvatarRex dataset and three sequences (A02, A05, A08)
from the ActorsHQ dataset [IЕҹДұk et al. 2023]. Additionally, we also
capture a new multi-view sequence of a person in a white shirt
dancing to train our model. Our training/evaluation setup and
model architectures are mostly the same as Li et al. [2024b]. The
differences are detailed in the supplementary material.
4.2
Rendering and Reconstruction Quality
Since there is currently no open-source work that models layered
animatable avatars from multi-view videos, we mainly compare
with our baseline: Animatable Gaussians [Li et al. 2024b], which
models body and clothing as a whole and do not attempt geometric
reconstruction. We quantitatively evaluate the rendering quality
using PSNR, SSIM [Wang et al. 2004], perceptual loss (LPIPS) [Zhang
et al. 2018] and FID [Heusel et al. 2017].
To evaluate the effectiveness of our geometric constraints, we
compare the geometry of the Gaussians reconstructed by the base-
line method [Li et al. 2024b] (single-layer without geometric con-
straints) and ours. Note that the baseline method does not provide
normals. Thus, we compute normals using the method illustrated
in Fig. 4. Fig. 7 shows geometric results of both methods, where
Gaussians are rendered as ordinary point clouds with normals. For
the baseline method, the messy shading near the leg area indicates
incorrect normal orientation. This suggests their reconstructed


Lin, S. et al
Gaussians do not lie on the actual geometric surface. On the other
hand, our method produces clean point cloud reconstructions using
Gaussians.
4.3
Animating Layered Avatars and Clothing
Transfer
Given trained LayGA models of different subjects, we can animate
one subject or use the garment model of рқҗҙand the body model of
рқҗөto generate a mixed avatar. Fig. 8 shows novel pose animation
results. Note that our layered representation can model tangential
motions of clothing. Fig. 6 (Fig. 9 shows an enlarged version) ex-
hibits clothing transfer results, where the leftmost subject in each
row provides the clothing model while others are the target shapes.
Thanks to our multi-layer design and collision resolving strategies
in Sec. 3.4, our method is capable of dressing a given garment to
different body shapes and generating photorealistic renderings.
5
DISCUSSION
In this paper, we present Layered Gaussian Avatars (LayGA) for
animatable clothing transfer. We propose two-stage training in-
volving single-layer reconstruction and multi-layer fitting. In the
single-layer reconstruction stage, we propose a series of geometric
constraints for surface reconstruction and segmentation. In the
multi-layer fitting stage, we train two separate models to repre-
sent the body and clothing, thus enabling clothing transfer across
different identities. Overall, our method outperforms the state-of-
the-art baseline [Li et al. 2024b] and realizes photorealistic virtual
try-on. Moreover, our geometrically constrained Gaussian render-
ing scheme, if considered as a stand-alone method, can also be used
for multi-view geometry reconstruction of humans.
Despite its good performance, our method still suffers from limi-
tations: (a) If the source garment is tight and the target body shape
is large, then our collision handling method may still fail (Fig. 10
left). (b) If a short-sleeve T-shirt is transferred to a body model wear-
ing long sleeves, the arm part would not produce correct rendering
results (Fig. 10 right). This is because the arm part of the target
shape is occluded during training, with no supervision forcing it to
take on skin colors. (c) The approach is not designed to simulate
the actual physics during clothing transfer, and the results may not
be physically realistic when transferring between very different
body sizes. We leave these as future work.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The work is supported by National Key R&D Program of China
(2022YFF0902200), the National Science Foundation of China (NSFC)
under Grant Number 62125107 and the Postdoctoral Fellowship
Program of China Postdoctoral Science Foundation under Grant
Number GZC20231304.
REFERENCES
Timur Bagautdinov, Chenglei Wu, Tomas Simon, Fabian Prada, Takaaki Shiratori,
Shih-En Wei, Weipeng Xu, Yaser Sheikh, and Jason Saragih. 2021. Driving-signal
aware full-body avatars. TOG 40, 4 (2021), 1вҖ“17.
Andrei Burov, Matthias NieГҹner, and Justus Thies. 2021. Dynamic surface function
networks for clothed human bodies. In ICCV. 10754вҖ“10764.
Yao Feng, Weiyang Liu, Timo Bolkart, Jinlong Yang, Marc Pollefeys, and Michael J
Black. 2023. Learning Disentangled Avatars with Hybrid 3D Representations. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2309.06441 (2023).
Yao Feng, Jinlong Yang, Marc Pollefeys, Michael J. Black, and Timo Bolkart. 2022. Cap-
turing and Animation of Body and Clothing from Monocular Video. In SIGGRAPH
Asia 2022 Conference Proceedings (SA вҖҷ22). Article 45, 9 pages.
Chen Guo, Tianjian Jiang, Xu Chen, Jie Song, and Otmar Hilliges. 2023. Vid2avatar:
3d avatar reconstruction from videos in the wild via self-supervised scene decom-
position. In CVPR. 12858вҖ“12868.
Marc Habermann, Lingjie Liu, Weipeng Xu, Gerard Pons-Moll, Michael Zollhoefer,
and Christian Theobalt. 2023. HDHumans: A hybrid approach for high-fidelity
digital humans. ACM SCA 6, 3 (2023), 1вҖ“23.
Marc Habermann, Lingjie Liu, Weipeng Xu, Michael Zollhoefer, Gerard Pons-Moll,
and Christian Theobalt. 2021. Real-time deep dynamic characters. TOG 40, 4 (2021),
1вҖ“16.
Martin Heusel, Hubert Ramsauer, Thomas Unterthiner, Bernhard Nessler, and Sepp
Hochreiter. 2017. Gans trained by a two time-scale update rule converge to a local
nash equilibrium. NeurIPS 30 (2017).
Shoukang Hu, Fangzhou Hong, Liang Pan, Haiyi Mei, Lei Yang, and Ziwei Liu. 2023.
SHERF: Generalizable Human NeRF from a Single Image. In ICCV.
Shoukang Hu and Ziwei Liu. 2024. GauHuman: Articulated Gaussian Splatting from
Monocular Human Videos. In CVPR.
Mustafa IЕҹДұk, Martin RГјnz, Markos Georgopoulos, Taras Khakhulin, Jonathan Starck,
Lourdes Agapito, and Matthias NieГҹner. 2023. HumanRF: High-Fidelity Neural
Radiance Fields for Humans in Motion. TOG 42, 4 (2023), 1вҖ“12.
Tianjian Jiang, Xu Chen, Jie Song, and Otmar Hilliges. 2023. Instantavatar: Learning
avatars from monocular video in 60 seconds. In CVPR. 16922вҖ“16932.
Wei Jiang, Kwang Moo Yi, Golnoosh Samei, Oncel Tuzel, and Anurag Ranjan. 2022.
Neuman: Neural human radiance field from a single video. In ECCV. Springer,
402вҖ“418.
Bernhard Kerbl, Georgios Kopanas, Thomas LeimkГјhler, and George Drettakis. 2023.
3d gaussian splatting for real-time radiance field rendering. TOG 42, 4 (2023), 1вҖ“14.
Taeksoo Kim, Byungjun Kim, Shunsuke Saito, and Hanbyul Joo. 2024. GALA: Generat-
ing Animatable Layered Assets from a Single Scan. In CVPR.
Muhammed Kocabas, Jen-Hao Rick Chang, James Gabriel, Oncel Tuzel, and Anurag
Ranjan. 2024. HUGS: Human Gaussian Splats. In CVPR.
Peike Li, Yunqiu Xu, Yunchao Wei, and Yi Yang. 2020. Self-correction for human
parsing. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence 44, 6 (2020),
3260вҖ“3271.
Ruilong Li, Julian Tanke, Minh Vo, Michael ZollhГ¶fer, JГјrgen Gall, Angjoo Kanazawa,
and Christoph Lassner. 2022. Tava: Template-free animatable volumetric actors. In
ECCV. Springer, 419вҖ“436.
Yifei Li, Hsiao yu Chen, Egor Larionov, Nikolaos Sarafianos, Wojciech Matusik, and
Tuur Stuyck. 2024a. DiffAvatar: Simulation-Ready Garment Optimization with
Differentiable Simulation. In CVPR.
Zhe Li, Zerong Zheng, Yuxiao Liu, Boyao Zhou, and Yebin Liu. 2023. PoseVocab:
Learning Joint-structured Pose Embeddings for Human Avatar Modeling. In ACM
SIGGRAPH Conference Proceedings.
Zhe Li, Zerong Zheng, Lizhen Wang, and Yebin Liu. 2024b. Animatable Gaussians:
Learning Pose-dependent Gaussian Maps for High-fidelity Human Avatar Modeling.
In CVPR.
Siyou Lin, Hongwen Zhang, Zerong Zheng, Ruizhi Shao, and Yebin Liu. 2022. Learning
implicit templates for point-based clothed human modeling. In ECCV. Springer,
210вҖ“228.
Lingjie Liu, Marc Habermann, Viktor Rudnev, Kripasindhu Sarkar, Jiatao Gu, and
Christian Theobalt. 2021. Neural actor: Neural free-view synthesis of human actors
with pose control. TOG 40, 6 (2021), 1вҖ“16.
Matthew Loper, Naureen Mahmood, Javier Romero, Gerard Pons-Moll, and Michael J
Black. 2015. SMPL: A skinned multi-person linear model. TOG 34, 6 (2015), 1вҖ“16.
Qianli Ma, Jinlong Yang, Anurag Ranjan, Sergi Pujades, Gerard Pons-Moll, Siyu Tang,
and Michael J Black. 2020. Learning to dress 3d people in generative clothing. In
CVPR. 6469вҖ“6478.
Qianli Ma, Jinlong Yang, Siyu Tang, and Michael J Black. 2021. The power of points
for modeling humans in clothing. In ICCV. 10974вҖ“10984.
Ben Mildenhall, Pratul P Srinivasan, Matthew Tancik, Jonathan T Barron, Ravi Ra-
mamoorthi, and Ren Ng. 2020. Nerf: Representing scenes as neural radiance fields
for view synthesis. In ECCV. Springer, 405вҖ“421.
Arthur Moreau, Jifei Song, Helisa Dhamo, Richard Shaw, Yiren Zhou, and Eduardo
PГ©rez-Pellitero. 2024. Human Gaussian Splatting: Real-time Rendering of Animat-
able Avatars. In CVPR.
Pablo Palafox, AljaЕҫ BoЕҫiДҚ, Justus Thies, Matthias NieГҹner, and Angela Dai. 2021. NPMS:
Neural parametric models for 3D deformable shapes. In IEEE/CVF International
Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV). 12695вҖ“12705.
Haokai Pang, Heming Zhu, Adam Kortylewski, Christian Theobalt, and Marc Haber-
mann. 2024. ASH: Animatable Gaussian Splats for Efficient and Photoreal Human
Rendering. In CVPR.
Georgios Pavlakos, Vasileios Choutas, Nima Ghorbani, Timo Bolkart, Ahmed A. A.
Osman, Dimitrios Tzionas, and Michael J. Black. 2019. Expressive Body Capture:
3D Hands, Face, and Body from a Single Image. In CVPR.
Bo Peng, Jun Hu, Jingtao Zhou, and Juyong Zhang. 2022. SelfNeRF: Fast Training
NeRF for Human from Monocular Self-rotating Video. arXiv:2210.01651 (2022).


LayGA: Layered Gaussian Avatars for Animatable Clothing Transfer
Sida Peng, Junting Dong, Qianqian Wang, Shangzhan Zhang, Qing Shuai, Xiaowei
Zhou, and Hujun Bao. 2021a. Animatable neural radiance fields for modeling
dynamic human bodies. In ICCV. 14314вҖ“14323.
Sida Peng, Zhen Xu, Junting Dong, Qianqian Wang, Shangzhan Zhang, Qing Shuai,
Hujun Bao, and Xiaowei Zhou. 2024. Animatable Implicit Neural Representations
for Creating Realistic Avatars from Videos. TPAMI (2024).
Sida Peng, Yuanqing Zhang, Yinghao Xu, Qianqian Wang, Qing Shuai, Hujun Bao, and
Xiaowei Zhou. 2021b. Neural body: Implicit neural representations with structured
latent codes for novel view synthesis of dynamic humans. In CVPR. 9054вҖ“9063.
Gerard Pons-Moll, Sergi Pujades, Sonny Hu, and Michael J Black. 2017. ClothCap:
Seamless 4D clothing capture and retargeting. TOG 36, 4 (2017), 1вҖ“15.
Sergey Prokudin, Qianli Ma, Maxime Raafat, Julien Valentin, and Siyu Tang. 2023.
Dynamic Point Fields. In ICCV. 7964вҖ“7976.
Helge Rhodin, Nadia Robertini, Dan Casas, Christian Richardt, Hans-Peter Seidel, and
Christian Theobalt. 2016. General Automatic Human Shape and Motion Capture
Using Volumetric Contour Cues. In Computer Vision вҖ“ ECCV 2016, Bastian Leibe,
Jiri Matas, Nicu Sebe, and Max Welling (Eds.). Springer International Publishing,
Cham, 509вҖ“526.
Helge Rhodin, Nadia Robertini, Christian Richardt, Hans-Peter Seidel, and Christian
Theobalt. 2015. A Versatile Scene Model With Differentiable Visibility Applied to
Generative Pose Estimation. In Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on
Computer Vision (ICCV).
Shunsuke Saito, Tomas Simon, Jason Saragih, and Hanbyul Joo. 2020. PIFuHD: Multi-
Level Pixel-Aligned Implicit Function for High-Resolution 3D Human Digitization.
In CVPR.
Shunsuke Saito, Jinlong Yang, Qianli Ma, and Michael J Black. 2021. SCANimate:
Weakly supervised learning of skinned clothed avatar networks. In CVPR. 2886вҖ“
2897.
Tianchang Shen, Jun Gao, Kangxue Yin, Ming-Yu Liu, and Sanja Fidler. 2021. Deep
Marching Tetrahedra: a Hybrid Representation for High-Resolution 3D Shape
Synthesis. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS).
Srinath Sridhar, Franziska Mueller, Antti Oulasvirta, and Christian Theobalt. 2015. Fast
and robust hand tracking using detection-guided optimization. In CVPR. 3213вҖ“3221.
https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPR.2015.7298941
Srinath Sridhar, Helge Rhodin, Hans-Peter Seidel, Antti Oulasvirta, and Christian
Theobalt. 2014. Real-Time Hand Tracking Using a Sum of Anisotropic Gaussians
Model. In 2014 2nd International Conference on 3D Vision, Vol. 1. 319вҖ“326. https:
//doi.org/10.1109/3DV.2014.37
Carsten Stoll, Nils Hasler, Juergen Gall, Hans-Peter Seidel, and Christian Theobalt.
2011. Fast articulated motion tracking using a sums of Gaussians body model. In
2011 International Conference on Computer Vision. 951вҖ“958. https://doi.org/10.1109/
ICCV.2011.6126338
Shih-Yang Su, Frank Yu, Michael ZollhГ¶fer, and Helge Rhodin. 2021. A-nerf: Articulated
neural radiance fields for learning human shape, appearance, and pose. NeurIPS 34
(2021), 12278вҖ“12291.
Zhaoqi Su, Liangxiao Hu, Siyou Lin, Hongwen Zhang, Shengping Zhang, Justus Thies,
and Yebin Liu. 2023. CaPhy: Capturing Physical Properties for Animatable Human
Avatars. In IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV).
Gusi Te, Xiu Li, Xiao Li, Jinglu Wang, Wei Hu, and Yan Lu. 2022. Neural Capture of
Animatable 3D Human from Monocular Video. In ECCV. Springer, 275вҖ“291.
Lizhen Wang, Xiaochen Zhao, Jingxiang Sun, Yuxiang Zhang, Hongwen Zhang, Tao
Yu, and Yebin Liu. 2023. StyleAvatar: Real-time Photo-realistic Portrait Avatar from
a Single Video. In SIGGRAPH Conference Proceedings.
Shaofei Wang, Katja Schwarz, Andreas Geiger, and Siyu Tang. 2022. Arah: Animatable
volume rendering of articulated human sdfs. In ECCV. Springer, 1вҖ“19.
Zhou Wang, Alan C Bovik, Hamid R Sheikh, and Eero P Simoncelli. 2004. Image quality
assessment: from error visibility to structural similarity. IEEE T-IP 13, 4 (2004),
600вҖ“612.
Chung-Yi Weng, Brian Curless, Pratul P Srinivasan, Jonathan T Barron, and Ira
Kemelmacher-Shlizerman. 2022. Humannerf: Free-viewpoint rendering of moving
people from monocular video. In CVPR. 16210вҖ“16220.
Donglai Xiang, Timur Bagautdinov, Tuur Stuyck, Fabian Prada, Javier Romero, Weipeng
Xu, Shunsuke Saito, Jingfan Guo, Breannan Smith, Takaaki Shiratori, et al. 2022.
Dressing Avatars: Deep Photorealistic Appearance for Physically Simulated Cloth-
ing. TOG 41, 6 (2022), 1вҖ“15.
Donglai Xiang, Fabian Prada, Timur Bagautdinov, Weipeng Xu, Yuan Dong, He Wen,
Jessica Hodgins, and Chenglei Wu. 2021. Modeling clothing as a separate layer for
an animatable human avatar. TOG 40, 6 (2021), 1вҖ“15.
Yuliang Xiu, Jinlong Yang, Xu Cao, Dimitrios Tzionas, and Michael J. Black. 2023.
ECON: Explicit Clothed humans Optimized via Normal integration. In CVPR.
Hongyi Xu, Thiemo Alldieck, and Cristian Sminchisescu. 2021. H-NeRF: Neural
radiance fields for rendering and temporal reconstruction of humans in motion.
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) 34 (2021), 14955вҖ“14966.
Keyang Ye, Tianjia Shao, and Kun Zhou. 2023. Animatable 3D Gaussians for High-
fidelity Synthesis of Human Motions. arXiv:2311.13404 [cs.CV]
Tao Yu, Zerong Zheng, Yuan Zhong, Jianhui Zhao, Qionghai Dai, Gerard Pons-Moll,
and Yebin Liu. 2019. Simulcap: Single-view human performance capture with cloth
simulation. In CVPR. IEEE, 5499вҖ“5509.
Hongwen Zhang, Siyou Lin, Ruizhi Shao, Yuxiang Zhang, Zerong Zheng, Han Huang,
Yandong Guo, and Yebin Liu. 2023. CloSET: Modeling Clothed Humans on Contin-
uous Surface with Explicit Template Decomposition. In CVPR.
Richard Zhang, Phillip Isola, Alexei A Efros, Eli Shechtman, and Oliver Wang. 2018.
The unreasonable effectiveness of deep features as a perceptual metric. In CVPR.
586вҖ“595.
Zerong Zheng, Han Huang, Tao Yu, Hongwen Zhang, Yandong Guo, and Yebin Liu.
2022. Structured local radiance fields for human avatar modeling. In CVPR. 15893вҖ“
15903.
Zerong Zheng, Xiaochen Zhao, Hongwen Zhang, Boning Liu, and Yebin Liu. 2023.
AvatarReX: Real-time Expressive Full-body Avatars. TOG 42, 4 (2023).
Wojciech Zielonka, Timur Bagautdinov, Shunsuke Saito, Michael ZollhГ¶fer, Jus-
tus Thies, and Javier Romero. 2023.
Drivable 3D Gaussian Avatars.
(2023).
arXiv:2311.08581 [cs.CV]


Lin, S. et al
Figure 8: Qualitatively results of novel pose animation. Our layered representation can model tangential motions between body
and clothing, e.g., when the T-shirt is lifted and the belt is revealed.
Figure 9: Our method enables animatable clothing transfer, and each row illustrates animation results with the same upper
garment but different identities.
