Title: Neural point-based shape modeling of humans in challenging clothing

Neural Point-based Shape Modeling of Humans in Challenging Clothing
Qianli Ma1,2
Jinlong Yang2
Michael J. Black2
Siyu Tang1
1ETH Z¨urich
2Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, T¨ubingen, Germany
{qianli.ma, siyu.tang}@inf.ethz.ch,
{qma,jyang,black}@tuebingen.mpg.de
(a) SCANimate [43]
(b) POP [27]
(c) Ours
(d) Predicted LBS Weights
(e) Ours, animated
Figure 1: Learning clothed avatars with SkiRT (Ours). When applied to challenging clothing types such as skirts and dresses, existing
methods for learning clothed human shape often (a) erroneously generate pant-like structures [43], or (b) suffer from inhomogeneous point
density and split-like artifacts in the predicted shape [27]. Our point-based approach (c) addresses these issues by predicting the LBS
weights relating the clothed surface to the body (d) and using a novel coarse shape representation in the posed space. SkiRT achieves state-
of-the-art modeling accuracy for pose-dependent shapes of humans in diverse types of clothing. Results from the point-based methods here
are rendered using a plain point renderer to highlight the difference between each method’s “raw” outputs.
Abstract
Parametric 3D body models like SMPL only represent
minimally-clothed people and are hard to extend to cloth-
ing because they have a ﬁxed mesh topology and resolution.
To address these limitations, recent work uses implicit sur-
faces or point clouds to model clothed bodies. While not
limited by topology, such methods still struggle to model
clothing that deviates signiﬁcantly from the body, such as
skirts and dresses. This is because they rely on the body
to canonicalize the clothed surface by reposing it to a ref-
erence shape. Unfortunately, this process is poorly deﬁned
when clothing is far from the body. Additionally, they use
linear blend skinning to pose the body and the skinning
weights are tied to the underlying body parts. In contrast,
we model the clothing deformation in a local coordinate
space without canonicalization.
We also relax the skin-
ning weights to let multiple body parts inﬂuence the surface.
Speciﬁcally, we extend point-based methods with a coarse
stage, that replaces canonicalization with a learned pose-
independent “coarse shape” that can capture the rough
surface geometry of clothing like skirts.
We then reﬁne
this using a network that infers the linear blend skinning
weights and pose dependent displacements from the coarse
representation. The approach works well for garments that
both conform to, and deviate from, the body. We demon-
strate the usefulness of our approach by learning person-
speciﬁc avatars from examples and then show how they can
be animated in new poses and motions. We also show that
the method can learn directly from raw scans with miss-
ing data, greatly simplifying the process of creating real-
istic avatars. Code is available for research purposes at
https://qianlim.github.io/SkiRT.
1. Introduction
A wide range of applications are driving recent interest
in creating animatable 3D human avatars from data. Given
a set of 3D scans or meshes of a person performing vari-
ous poses, the goal is to create a model of the clothed body
that can be controlled by the body pose, with the clothing
deforming naturally as the body moves. Such technology
will greatly simplify the creation of avatars for immersive
experiences in teleconferences, gaming, and virtual try-on,
to name a few. Traditional solutions to this task typically
require an artist-designed clothing template, a step that reg-
isters the template to data, and a process to associate the
arXiv:2209.06814v1  [cs.CV]  14 Sep 2022


registered data to a controllable bone structure. These all
involve expert knowledge and manual effort.
While registering a mesh template to a clothed body scan
is challenging and error-prone, there are tractable solutions
to estimate the minimally-clothed body pose and shape that
lies under clothing [4, 5, 35, 51, 59], i.e., to ﬁt a paramet-
ric human body model [18, 23, 36, 56] to clothed scans.
This gives rise to a promising alternative to the complex
traditional pipeline. Recent methods build shape models of
clothed humans using clothed scans and the corresponding
minimally-clothed bodies, thereby side-stepping the need
for per-garment mesh templates [3, 34, 44].
To go beyond minimally-clothed body models such as
SMPL [23] to capture the complex shape of clothed bod-
ies, recent attempts either displace the vertices of the
body template mesh [6, 26, 29, 46] or learn a neural im-
plicit ﬁeld (without relying on templates) that captures the
clothing shape conditioned on the body pose parameters
[8, 43, 47, 52]. While these methods show promising re-
sults on T-shirts, pants, or even closed jackets, they exhibit
limitations for clothing types that are topologically different
from the body, like dresses and skirts. To date, these remain
a major challenge for both tempate-based and template-free
models of clothed humans.
One of the key problems of these existing formulations is
that they require explicit canonicalization. Some work as-
sumes the canonicalized data is given [26, 30], whereas the
recent trend is to learn a backward transformation ﬁeld to
“unpose” the data to a consistent canonical pose [8, 43, 52].
On a high-level, canonicalization is a process that trans-
forms all points on the posed, clothed body surface to a
pre-deﬁned pose, using the bone transformations derived
from the underlying body. Here, a hidden assumption is
that the unposing of clothing can be driven simply by the
unposing of the minimally-clothed body. While this is true
for many clothing types that lie close to the body (such as
T-shirts and pants), the assumption often fails for garments
that differ greatly from the body shape and topology, such
as skirts and dresses. The canonicalization step for a skirt
is ill-deﬁned, and canonicalizing such surfaces with exist-
ing body-based approaches often leads to artifacts, as we
demonstrate in Sec. 3; see Fig. 2.
In contrast to canonicalization methods, shape deforma-
tion can be modeled in local, posed, coordinates; e.g., re-
cent point-based clothed human models [25, 27] directly
model shape in the posed space. For a query point on the
body surface, a clothing displacement vector is predicted
in a pre-deﬁned local coordinate system anchored to that
point. These methods represent the pose-dependent shapes
of skirts by simple offsets from the unclothed body model.
However, as the deﬁnition of the local coordinate frame re-
lies on the linear blend skinning (LBS) weights of SMPL
(Sec. 3), these methods are tied to body part transforma-
tions, resulting in clear surface discontinuities on the skirts
and dresses; see Fig. 1.
Here, we follow the point-based approach but further
equip it with a few key innovations that combine the tra-
ditional pipeline with implicit surface-based body modeling
techniques. Speciﬁcally, we extend the point-based method,
POP [27], with a learned, pose-independent “coarse shape”
that captures the rough surface geometry of clothing. The
coarse shape serves a similar role as the clothing template in
the traditional pipeline. Instead of using a manually crafted
mesh, however, our point-based coarse geometry is learned
from data, is not tied to speciﬁc mesh topology, and is
hence ﬂexible in representing various clothing types. We
reﬁne this coarse shape using a neural network that predicts
pose-dependent displacements from the coarse representa-
tion, in their respective local coordinates. Differing from
prior work [27], the transformations from the local to the
world coordinates are not taken from the underlying body
model, but predicted by a neural network. Additionally, we
introduce an adaptive regularization technique to train the
pipeline, which encourages a more uniform spatial distribu-
tion of the generated point clouds. As we show in the exper-
iments, these innovations lead to improved modeling accu-
racy and, more importantly, are essential to solving the typ-
ical surface discontinuity problems found in previous work.
These key components enable our new method, SkiRT
(Skinned Reﬁned Template-free),
which creates pose-
dependent shape models of clothed humans from 3D scans.
We evaluate SkiRT on diverse clothing types, with a spe-
cial focus on skirts and dresses of different lengths, tight-
ness and styles; of course, SkiRT also models simpler
clothing types. SkiRT tackles the long-standing difﬁculty
of modeling challenging clothing types such as skirts and
dresses, outperforming state-of-the-art methods from both
the point-based and implicit surface-based families on the
pose-dependent clothing modeling task. Furthermore, with
an extensive ablation study, we carefully analyze the key
components in our pipeline, providing insights for future
point-based models of clothed human body geometry.
2. Related Work
In this section we review previous work that captures and
models 3D clothing with data-driven learning approaches.
Template-based clothed human modeling.
Existing
graphics software and, in particular, 3D clothing simula-
tion, uses 3D meshes to represent human bodies and cloth-
ing. Physics-based cloth simulation has been widely used to
train data-driven clothing models [3, 12, 17, 34, 44, 45, 49,
57], and mesh-based models of minimally-clothed humans
are common [2, 23, 36, 56]. Mesh-based body models have
been a foundation for capturing and representing clothing
deviation from the the body [15, 20, 26, 29, 37, 50, 58, 60].
2


While deep learning methods can be used to model cloth-
ing deviation on meshes [14, 39, 48], these methods re-
main limited when it comes to skirts and dresses. Unlike
many pants and tops, skirts and dresses differ greatly from
the body surface, making it infeasible to deform a com-
mon body template mesh to ﬁt the data. To capture skirts
and dresses, some methods exploit customized template
meshes [15, 16, 37, 50, 60, 61]. With such an approach,
one must manually design templates for a wide variety of
clothing styles, making this approach impractical. In con-
trast, our method is “template-free” in that it replaces the
per-garment mesh templates with data-driven coarse shapes
that serve a similar role. This obviates the expensive manual
labor and can, in principle, model arbitrary skirt styles.
Template-free clothed human modeling. To deal with the
problems of template-based approaches, recent work goes
beyond meshes and exploits new representations that do
not require a per-garment template. A popular and promis-
ing approach uses deep implicit shapes [9, 11, 28, 33] to
capture [4, 13, 41, 42, 53–55] and model clothed humans
[7, 8, 10, 30, 31, 43, 47, 52]. Although such representa-
tions adapt to varied topology, these methods [8, 30, 43, 52]
do not perform well when modeling skirts, especially wide
and long skirts. The problem originates from the need to
canonicalize the training data as detailed in Sec. 3. In con-
trast, point clouds provide an alternative representation. Ma
et al. [25] successfully model clothing or clothed humans
with point clouds, and further demonstrate in [27] that their
approach can be extended to train a single model of various
clothing styles. While promising, dense point clouds can
have trouble with skirts, producing a discontinuous repre-
sentation between the legs. The reason is that these meth-
ods are still tied to the topology of the unclothed body, as
we analyze in Sec. 3. Our work uses a “coarse stage” with a
local coordinate space to avoid the issues in previous work.
It also uses a network to predict more reasonable skinning
weights for the skirt points, minimizing the discontinuities
seen with previous work.
In a similar spirit, concurrent
work [21] also enhances the point-based clothing represen-
tation with a coarse template; but [21] uses diffusion to ac-
quire clothing skinning weights, whereas our method learns
the skinning weights from data.
3. Analyzing the Challenges of Skirts
Given a clothed scan with known body pose, many meth-
ods transform the clothed scan to a common canonical pose.
This helps factor out the articulation-related deformations
in the clothed body shape, reducing data variation and fa-
cilitating model learning. A premise for canonicalization to
work is that the clothing, when dressed on the body, behaves
similarly to the unclothed body under different poses. Many
tops and pants mostly satisfy this assumption, as evidenced
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 2: Typical failure case due to canonicalization of skirts
using the learned inverse-LBS methods. Result produced by [43]
on a training example. Given a raw scan (a), canonicalization often
tears or creases the skirt (b), leading to areas in canonical space
without good supervision. A neural implicit function trained with
such canonicalized shapes yields visible artifacts (c).
by the success of recent canonicalization-based models on
these garment types [8, 26, 37, 43, 52]. However, the sur-
face deformation of skirts and dresses does not directly fol-
low the body articulation. Consequently, extra care needs
to be taken to canonicalize and animate such clothing [37],
e.g., by introducing extra/virtual bones [22, 32].
Figure 2 shows a typical failure mode of a state-of-the-
art canonicalization method, SCANimate [43], on a dress.
Here, the clothing-body association is predicted by a neu-
ral network, which is learned from data. Theoretically, the
network should be able to learn an optimal canonical skirt
shape such that it matches the data when transformed back
to the posed space. However, in practice, it is difﬁcult to
avoid over-stretching and splitting the raw scans. When the
neural network is trained to ﬁll the gap without supervision,
reposing the canonical representation produces creases. As
a result, even on training data (as in Fig. 2), the learned re-
constructed skirt shape typically has a clear crease, with the
resulting garment looking more like wide pants.
The recent point-based clothed human model, POP [27],
side-steps explicit canonicalization and models the clothed
body shapes in the posed space using local coordinates.
While showing the potential of capturing clothing that dif-
fers from the body topology, POP typically exhibits a fail-
ure mode when representing skirts: the skirt surface is often
torn apart in the region between the legs, as shown in Figs. 1
and 3. One of the key reasons is that the local coordinates
are deﬁned based on the unclothed body shape and topol-
ogy, as we analyze below.
In a nutshell, the POP model densely queries locations
on the body surface and generates a clothing displacement
vector at each query. For a query point bi ∈R3 on the posed
body, the clothing displacement ˆri ∈R3 is predicted in its
associated local coordinate system. The local coordinate
frame is a Cartesian coordinate system with bi being the
origin. The clothing point’s location in world coordinates is
3


(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 3: Failure mode of the SoTA point-based method on a
skirt. (a) Points P1, P2 denote two neighboring points on the skirt
surface, displaced from the left and right leg respectively. When
the pose changes, (b), previous work [27] skins these according to
the body point skinning weights, resulting in a “hard” association
to only the respective body part (the solid colored lines). This
leads to a discontinuous skirt surface in the new pose. (c) Our
approach predicts blended skinning weights for each point (the
dashed colored lines) leading to a more even distribution of points.
then given by:
xi = ˆTi · ˆri + bi.
(1)
In POP, the transformations ˆTi between the local and world
coordinate systems are pre-computed using the joint trans-
formations of the SMPL model:
ˆTi =
J
X
j=1
w(i)
j,SMPLTj,
(2)
where each Tj is the 4 × 4 rotation-translation transforma-
tion matrix of the body’s j-th joint from the canonical-pose
space to the posed space, J is the number of joints, and
w(i)
j,SMPL is SMPL’s linear blend skinning (LBS) weight that
associates bi to the j-th joint, s.t. PJ
j=1 w(i)
j,SMPL = 1.
Notice that ˆTi in fact also yields bi (on the posed body)
from its corresponding location ˆbi in the canonical pose1:
bi = ˆTi · ˆbi. It then becomes clear that the POP pipeline is
equivalent to building the model in the canonical space:
xi = ˆTi · ˆxi,
(3)
with ˆxi = ˆri + ˆbi being the clothed body in the canonical
pose. While the predictions are made in the canonical space,
POP does not explicitly canonicalize the scan data, and uses
the original posed data as supervision during training. This
bypasses the drawbacks of the explicit canonicalization as
earlier discussed.
However, the pre-computed local coordinate transforma-
tions are problematic for skirts. The points on the skirt sur-
face are displaced from either the left or right leg. Consider
1With a slight abuse of notation, bi can represent the homogeneous
coordinates when necessary.
d
LBS
LBS
Figure 4: Method Overview. Given a point ˆbi on the body sur-
face in canonical pose, we use it to query the three MLP networks
that predict the pose-independent coarse clothing shape ˆrcoarse, the
pose-dependent detailed clothing offsets ˆrﬁne (Sec. 4.1), and the
LBS weights on the clothing w(i)
pred (Sec. 4.2), respectively. The
learned LBS weights are used to transform the canonical-space
prediction ˆxﬁne
i
to the posed space xﬁne
i .
two neighboring points, P1 and P2, from the between-leg
region on the skirt surface in Fig. 3. P1 and P2 are dis-
placed from the right and left leg, respectively. With POP,
the LBS weights for P1, P2 are effectively drawn from one
leg or the other; i.e.
wP1
right leg ≈1 and wP2
left leg ≈1, while
other LBS weights from other bones are approximately 0.
When the leg pose changes, P1 and P2 thus follow the rigid
transformation of only their respective leg. When the legs
move apart, so do the points on the skirt, Fig. 3(b). Al-
though POP’s predicted non-rigid pose-dependent displace-
ments can, in theory, compensate for the discrepancy of
the rigid transforms, in our experiments, we ﬁnd this in-
sufﬁcient. Speciﬁcally, the proximity of points on the skirt
varies with pose. This results in a gap in the 3D represen-
tation that splits the skirt into two parts. In fact, the local
transformations, as deﬁned in Eq. (2), result in a discon-
tinuity of the displacement ﬁeld on the skirt surface. We
show this with an experiment in Sec. 5.1.
4. Method
Overview.
To cope with the challenging clothing types
such as skirts and dresses, we push the limit of the local
coordinate-based point representation by introducing a se-
ries of new components. The training of our method takes
a set of scans (point clouds) that capture the shape of a
person wearing the same outﬁt in varying poses. For each
scan, we ﬁt a SMPL body that captures the body shape and
pose under clothing. We ﬁrst train a coarse-stage neural
network that takes in the SMPL bodies and predicts a pose-
independent shape of the clothed body (Sec. 4.1). We then
reﬁne this coarse shape with another neural network that
predicts a pose-dependent, detailed clothing displacement
ﬁeld in the local coordinates. The ﬁne stage also predicts
a ﬁeld of transformations of these local coordinates in the
form of LBS weights (Sec. 4.2). The displacements are
4


then added to the coarse shape and posed using the pre-
dicted transformations, yielding the ﬁnal clothed body pre-
diction. We additionally introduce an adaptive regulariza-
tion algorithm in Sec. 4.3 to facilitate training the pipeline.
An overview of our method is illustrated in Fig. 4.
4.1. Coarse-to-ﬁne Prediction
Based on the analysis in Sec. 3, an immediate remedy
is to associate the points on a skirt to multiple body parts,
instead of a “hard” association to only one part. Taking
Fig. 3 again as an intuitive example: if both points P1, P2
are associated with both legs, they will undergo similar rigid
transformations as the legs move, hence maintaining their
proximity, Fig. 3(c). This amounts to “spreading” the LBS
weights to all the leg joints instead of tightly associating
them with one, such that the LBS weights on the skirt sur-
face vary smoothly in space. The remaining question is,
how to get such smoothly transitioning LBS weights on the
clothed body surface? Our answer is to ﬁrst learn a pose-
independent coarse shape and then use it to query a pre-
diffused smooth LBS weight ﬁeld derived from SMPL.
Pose-independent coarse shape. We ﬁrst introduce a neu-
ral network that predicts the coarse shape of clothing, rep-
resented as residual vectors ˆrcoarse
i
from the body:
ˆrcoarse
i
= fcoarse(ˆbi, zcoarse) : R3 × RZcoarse →R3,
(4)
where fcoarse(·) is a multi-layer-preceptron (MLP), ˆbi is a
query point on the neutrally-posed body, and zcoarse is a
global geometry code. For the coarse stage, we use the LBS
from the SMPL model to bring the predictions back to the
posed space, Eq. (1). By querying over the entire body sur-
face, a coarse shape of the clothed body can be constructed.
Since the coarse MLP does not take in any body pose in-
formation, the output is pose-independent. Training it on all
data with varied poses results in a coarse clothed body shape
that minimizes the discrepancy to all examples. Intuitively
this facilitates the subsequent ﬁne stage, where the network
then only needs to predict a small pose-dependent residual
on the coarse base shape. The learned coarse shape takes the
place of an artist-designed garment template in a traditional
graphics pipeline, but the ﬂexible point-based representa-
tion enables our method to be applied to different clothing
types without manually deﬁning garment templates.
Pose-dependent ﬁne shape. For the ﬁne stage, we follow
the design of POP [27] and train another MLP, fﬁne(·), that
takes in a local geometry descriptor zﬁne
i
, a local pose de-
scriptor zpose
i
, and outputs a clothing residual in the local
coordinates:
ˆrﬁne
i
= fﬁne(ˆbi, zﬁne
i
, zpose
i
) : R3×RZﬁne ×RZpose →R3, (5)
where the subscript i of the descriptors denotes that they
are local to each query point. Following POP, the geome-
try features zcoarse
i
and zﬁne
i
are learned in an auto-decoding
fashion. But, unlike POP, the predicted residuals are now
added to the coarse clothed body shape, instead of the un-
clothed body model. The fﬁne(·) MLP branches out another
head at the ﬁnal layer to predict the normal vector in the
local coordindates. More details of the local descriptors are
provided in Appendix A.1.
Pre-diffused LBS weight ﬁeld. With the learned clothed
coarse body shape, we are now able to deﬁne smoothly-
varying LBS weights for the coarse shape. To do so, we
ﬁrst diffuse SMPL’s LBS weights to R3 using nearest neigh-
bor assignment as in LoopReg [5].
Such a pre-diffused
LBS weight ﬁeld has many undesirable discontinuities in
space (see Appendix B.1.). We then run an optimization
to smooth the ﬁeld. To do so, we sample a regular grid in
the diffused space, and minimize the discrepancy between
each grid point’s LBS weight and the average weight of its
1-ring neighbors; this is analogous to applying Laplacian
smoothing to the LBS weights. The optimization results
in a LBS weight ﬁeld that has a smoother spatial varia-
tion. Finally, we use the points from the coarse shape to
query this ﬁeld, obtaining smoothly-varing LBS weights on
the clothed body “template”. More details about our LBS
smoothing algorithm can be found in the Appendix B.1.
4.2. Predicting Local Transformations
Although the optimized LBS weight ﬁeld in theory ad-
dresses the single association problem, the optimization is
based on heuristics and it is unclear if these pre-processed
LBS weights are the optimal choice for every clothing type.
Therefore, we train another neural network, gLBS(·), to pre-
dict the LBS weights, and use the pre-diffused ﬁeld for reg-
ularization:
w(i)
pred = gLBS(ˆbi, zﬁne
i
) : R3 × RZﬁne →RJ,
(6)
with w(i)
pred = {w(i)
j,pred}J
j=1 being the set of predicted LBS
weights at the query location ˆbi. Note that the LBS predic-
tion network is conditioned on the clothing geometry fea-
tures but not the pose features, following the common de-
sign principle that the LBS weights are outﬁt-speciﬁc but
pose-independent.
Using the predicted LBS weights, we modify Eq. (2) as:
ˆT ′
i =
J
X
j=1
w(i)
j,predTj.
(7)
The clothing residuals and surface normals predicted from
the ﬁne stage, ˆrﬁne
i
, are now transformed with the predicted
local transformations ˆT ′
i.
4.3. Point-adaptive Upsampling and Regularization
In POP, when the skirt “splits”, the points becomes ex-
ceptionally sparse on the region between the legs, Fig. 3(b).
5


We propose an algorithm to increase the point density for
such regions, aiming to eliminate such artifacts in a sim-
ple post-processing step. To identify the points in the low-
density region, we compute the average distance of each
point to its k-nearest neighbors (kNN, we use k=5). This
measures how isolated each point is from its neighbors, giv-
ing a measure of local point density. We then again query
the underlying body surface using the kNN radius as guid-
ance, and assign a higher sampling probability to the re-
gions with low point density.
As we show in the experiments, this simple post-process
can make the point distribution more uniform and visually
reduce the “split” artifact, but unfortunately does not elim-
inate it entirely. This indicates that the learned neural ﬁeld
for the skirt surface is still discontinuous.
To address this, we introduce the point-adaptive idea in
training. For points that have a large kNN radius, we set
a smaller weight λadapt
i
for the regularization on the norm
of their displacements (see Eq. (8)). Intuitively, with a uni-
form sampling on the body surface, the displaced clothing
points with a large kNN radius are more likely to be far from
the body. Consequently, the clothing deformations there re-
ceive less inﬂuence from the body articulations, hence the
non-rigid deformations (displacements) can have more free-
dom. As we show in the experiments, the point-adaptive
regularization effectively improves the uniformity of the
generated point clouds. Further details of the point-adaptive
sampling are provided in the Appendix B.2.
4.4. Training and Inference
Our pipeline is trained with a two-stage regime. The
coarse shape network is trained ﬁrst such that it provides
a base shape for the ﬁne stage training.
It also serves
as a medium to acquire the pre-diffused LBS weights for
regularizing the LBS prediction. The pose-dependent ﬁne
shape network and the LBS weight prediction networks are
trained together end-to-end.
Since the coarse base shape does not vary with pose,
when dealing with unseen poses at test-time, we only need
to run the ﬁne-stage inference given the query pose.
Loss Functions. Both the coarse and ﬁne stages are trained
with a weighted sum of the Chamfer Distance LCD, a nor-
mal consistency loss Ln, and a regularization term Lrgl on
the norm of the predicted displacements.
The standard
Chamfer and normal losses follow the formulation in [27]
and we defer their description in the Appendix A.1.
The predicted displacements ˆrcoarse and ˆrﬁne are regular-
ized by their L2-norm, weighted by the point-adaptive reg-
ularization strength λadapt
i
as discussed in Sec. 4.3:
Lrgl =
1
|X|
|X|
X
i=1
λadapt
i
ˆri
2
2.
(8)
For the ﬁne stage speciﬁcally, we use two regularization
terms to facilitate the learning of the LBS weight prediction.
The ﬁrst one is a direct L1 regularization using the ground
truth LBS weights from the underlying body:
LLBS =
1
|X|
|X|
X
i=1
w(i)
pred −w(i)′
SMPL

1,
(9)
where w(i)′
SMPL is the pre-diffused and smoothed SMPL LBS
weights as discribed in Sec. 4.1.
Additionally we introduce a reprojection loss as follows:
Lreproj =
1
|X|
|X|
X
i=1
T ′
iˆbi −b(gt)
i

2,
(10)
where ˆbi is a sampled point on the body in canonical pose,
T ′
i is the local transform derived from the predicted LBS
weights (Eq. (7)), and b(gt)
i
is the corresponding point on
the ground truth body surface. That is, we use the learned
transformations to reproject the canonical-posed body to
the pose space, such that it matches the ground truth posed
body. Similar to LLBS, this term also penalizes the learned
LBS weights for deviating too far from those of the body.
Further details on the model architecture and training hy-
perparameters are provided in the Appendix A.1.
5. Experimental Evaluation
Baselines.
We compare SkiRT with two state-of-the-art
clothed human modeling methods: SCANimate [43] and
POP [27]. SCANimate uses a neural implicit shape repre-
sentaiton and performs explicit data canonicalization. POP,
like our method, represents clothed bodies using dense
point clouds predicted in local coordinates.
We also compare with various ablated versions to our
method: (a) we train POP with our adaptive regularization
technique as described in Sec. 4.3; (b) we replace SMPL
LBS weights in POP with our pre-diffused and smoothed
LBS weights as discussed in Sec. 4.1; and (c) we enhance
POP with predicted LBS weights as described in Sec. 4.2,
but without the coarse-to-ﬁne strategy.
Datasets and Metrics.
We primarily evaluate on the
ReSynth dataset [27], a synthetic dataset of clothed humans
featuring rich geometric details and salient pose-dependent
clothing deformations.
We pay special attention to sub-
jects wearing skirts and dresses of varied styles, lengths and
tightness, but also evaluate on several non-skirt outﬁts, to
holistically characterize each method. Following [27], we
evaluate all the methods using the Chamfer Distance (m2)
and the L1 normal discrepancy, averaged over all sampled
points from each method’s prediction. See Appendix for
more details on the evaluation setup.
6


Table 1:
Quantitative comparison with baselines and the ablated versions of our method on the ReSynth [27] dataset. CD: Chamfer
Distance (×10−4m2); NML: L1 discrepancy between the predicted and ground truth unit normals (×10−1). Both the lower the better. The
best results are shown in bold. The upper section contains subjects wearing skirt/dress outﬁts; the lower section contains subjects wearing
non-skirt loose clothing such as jackets (carla-004, eric-035) and wide T-shirts with pants (alexandra-006).
Subject ID
SCANimate [43]
POP [27]
Ablation (a)
Ablation (b)
Ablation (c)
Ours, Full
CD
NML
CD
NML
CD
NML
CD
NML
CD
NML
CD
NML
anna-001
1.34
1.35
0.62
0.82
0.59
0.82
0.59
0.82
0.60
0.81
0.58
0.81
beatrice-025
0.74
1.33
0.34
0.75
0.32
0.75
0.33
0.75
0.33
0.75
0.31
0.77
christine-027
3.21
1.66
1.72
0.97
1.74
1.00
1.68
0.97
1.68
0.97
1.54
0.99
janett-025
2.81
1.59
1.24
0.89
1.23
0.85
1.24
0.82
1.19
0.81
1.10
0.82
felice-004
20.79
2.94
7.34
1.24
7.43
1.25
6.96
1.22
6.95
1.22
6.45
1.25
debra-014
20.38
2.61
7.40
1.26
7.59
1.30
7.05
1.28
7.13
1.26
6.29
1.26
carla-004
0.90
1.52
0.51
1.02
0.51
1.07
0.53
1.06
0.52
1.05
0.48
1.06
alexandra-006
2.28
1.84
1.71
1.29
1.68
1.28
1.67
1.28
1.74
1.28
1.51
1.29
eric-035
2.54
1.94
1.34
1.16
1.33
1.16
1.33
1.16
1.33
1.13
1.30
1.17
SCANimate [43]
POP [27]
POP + Adpt. up.
Ablation (a)
Ablation (b)
Ablation (c)
Full Model
Figure 5: Qualitative comparison with baselines and ablated versions of our model. “Adpt. up.” means using adaptive upsampling as a
post-process. Subject IDs from top to bottom: “felice-004”, “anna-001”, “eric-035”. Best viewed zoomed-in on a color screen.
5.1. Comparison to Prior Methods
Table 1 summarizes the quantitative errors on the 9
subject-outﬁt types from the ReSynth dataset.
On most
clothing types, our method shows a clear performance ad-
vantage over the baselines. As analyzed in Sec. 3, SCANi-
mate often suffers from the pant-like artifacts for skirts, er-
roneously generating extra surfaces under the skirt and lead-
ing to high Chamfer errors especially for skirts and dresses.
This shows the limitation of explicit canonicalization on
these challenging clothing types. In contrast, POP performs
reasonably well on most subjects, showing the advantage
of modeling using local coordinates. However, the results
from POP often suffer from an uneven distribution of points,
especially for the long skirts and dresses, as shown in Fig. 5
(also see the teaser ﬁgure). Using our adaptive upsampling
as post-process, the “split” artifact in the skirts can be par-
tially reduced, as shown in the third column in Fig. 5. In
contrast, our full model achieves a more uniform point dis-
tribution for both skirts and “plain” clothing as shown in
Fig. 5: for skirts, it effectively eliminates the “split” artifact
present in prior methods; for the blazer jacket it achieves
the highest sharpness representing the collar and the lapel.
5.2. Ablation Study
Comparing our full model with its ablated versions (a)-
(c), we see the effectiveness of our introduced compo-
7


Figure 6: Examples of using SkiRT to complete raw scans on two
challenging clothing types. See Appendix for animated results.
Figure 7: Avatar creation from raw scans. Left: raw training scan
data with missing information (holes). Right: animation of learned
avatar with pose-dependent clothing deformation.
nents. Ablation (a) adds the point-adaptive regularization
to POP in training, resulting in a more uniform distribu-
tion of points. However, this mechanism alone does not en-
sure consistently lower errors compared to the original POP
model. In ablation (b), the pre-diffused LBS weight ﬁeld
indeed improves the numerical accuracy for all dress/skirt
outﬁts, which, to an extent, veriﬁes our analysis in Sec. 3.
However, as shown in Fig. 5, the point density still remains
highly uneven for skirts. This motivates us to learn the LBS
weights instead of using the ﬁxed, pre-diffused version.
Ablation (c) differs from POP in that it predicts the LBS
weights. But without the coarse stage, here the predicted
displacements are added directly to the body surface. De-
spite a higher accuracy than POP for all skirt outﬁts, qualita-
tively this version still suffers from an inhomogeneous point
distribution especially for the long skirt. This illustrates the
value of the coarse stage. Finally, with the coarse stage, the
full model achieves the lowest Chamfer error on all clothing
types (both skirts and non-skirts), with an especially clear
improvement on the two long skirt subjects, “felice-004”
and “debra-014”, as can also be seen in the visual results.
In the Appendix C.2 we further discuss the inﬂuence of the
point cloud quality on the mesh reconstruction.
5.3. Raw Scan Completion and Avatar Creation
SkiRT learns a continuous clothing displacement ﬁeld
from the body, and is able to deal with raw scans too. Here
we demonstrate two applications of SkiRT on raw scans.
Details of these experiments are provided in the Appendix.
Scan completion. The raw scans from real world scanners
typically contain holes, and our pipeline can serve as a so-
lution to hole-ﬁlling and scan completion. Consider a se-
quence (typically 200-300 frames) of raw, incomplete scans
of a subject. We ﬁrst ﬁt the SMPL body to each frame, and
then train our pipeline with the scan-body pairs. Our model
can leverage the shared information between different data
frames (i.e. the subject wears the same garment), and pre-
dict a completed shape for each frame, as shown in Fig. 6.
Avatar creation from raw scans. As shown above, SkiRT
is robust to missing regions in raw scans. With sufﬁcient
data, it is possible to create a clothed human avatar with
pose-dependent clothing deformation directly from raw
scans. Here we show such an application in Fig. 7. Trained
directly on raw scans of the subject “03375-blazerlong” in
the CAPE dataset [26], SkiRT is capable of animating the
subject in novel poses with natural pose-dependent clothing
deformation. This automated process signiﬁcantly reduces
the manual effort required for realistic avatar creation.
6. Conclusion
We have introduced a novel point-based representation
for modeling clothed humans that, without loss of gener-
ality, addresses challenging clothing types such as skirts
and dresses. It consists of three key innovations: a coarse-
to-ﬁne scheme, predicted local transformations, and point-
adaptive up-sampling and regularization. We have system-
atically analyzed and evaluated our model on diverse cloth-
ing types with different skirt lengths, tightness and styles,
outperforming the state-of-the-art methods and providing
insights for future work on point-based representations for
modeling clothed humans.
Limitations and future work. Learning effective skinning
weights for clothed body surfaces requires diverse training
poses. When training data has very limited pose variations,
our learned LBS weights (hence the local-to-world transfor-
mations) may fail to generalize to unseen poses. The gener-
alization in pose space with limited training data remains
a challenging topic for future research. The point-based
coarse stage can sometimes lead to slightly noisier point
sets than POP; see Appendix for detailed discussions. In
this paper, we have demonstrated subject-speciﬁc modeling,
but our formulation is also compatible with multi-subject
training by, for example, auto-decoding a clothing geome-
try code for each subject as in POP [27]. Given sufﬁcient
subject and clothing type variation, it should be possible to
learn a shape space of clothed bodies using our approach.
Acknowledgements and disclosure: We thank Shaofei Wang for
helpful discussions. Qianli Ma is partially supported by the Max
Planck ETH Center for Learning Systems. MJB’s conﬂicts of in-
terest can be found at https://files.is.tue.mpg.de/
black/CoI_3DV_2022.txt.
8


Appendix
In this appendix we provide more details on the model de-
signs and experimental setups (Sec. A), further elaborations
on our method (Sec. B), and further discussions on experi-
mental results, limitations and failure cases (Sec. C). Please
also refer to the video for animated results.
A. Implementation Details
A.1. SkiRT
Architecture.
The coarse and the ﬁne shape prediction
have the same architectural design, but majorly differ in
their inputs. Both networks are a 8-layer multi-layer percep-
tron (MLP) comprising 256 neurons per layer, and with the
SoftPlus as the nonlinear activation. Following [33], a skip
connection is added from the input layer to the fourth layer
of the network. From the ﬁfth layer the network branches
out two heads with the same architecture that predicts the
point locations and normals respectively.
The coarse shape MLP takes as input the Cartesian co-
ordinates of a query point from the surface of the SMPL-X
body in the canonical pose ˆbi ∈R3, as well as a global
shape code zcoarse ∈R256. The global shape code is shared
by all query locations for the coarse stage.
The ﬁne detail MLP takes a query coordinates ˆbi ∈R3, a
local shape descriptor zﬁne
i
∈R64, and a local pose descrip-
tor zpose
i
∈R64. Each query location on the body surface
is associated with a unique local shape descriptor zﬁne
i
that
is an optimizable latent vector learned in an auto-decoding
fashion [33]. To get the pose descriptor zpose
i
, we follow [27]
and ﬁrst encode the UV-positional map (with a resolution of
128×128) of the unclothed posed body by a U-Net [40], re-
sulting in a 128×128×64-dimensional pose feature tensor.
For each query location ˆbi, we ﬁnd its corresponding UV-
coordinate ˆui ∈R2, and obtain the local pose feature zpose
i
by querying the spatial dimensions (i.e. the ﬁrst two dimen-
sions) of the pose feature tensor using ˆui with bilinear in-
terpolation. We empirically ﬁnd that this U-Net-based pose
feature encoder provides the sharpest geometric details. Re-
placing it with e.g. the ﬁltered local pose parameters (as in
SCANimate [43]) yields a signiﬁcant performance drop.
The skinning weights prediction network is a 5-layer
MLP that comprises 256 neurons per intermediate layer.
The ﬁnal layer outputs a 22-dimentional vector that corre-
sponds to the 22 clothing-related body joints in the SMPL-
X model (we merged all ﬁnger-related joints into a “hand”
joint for each hand). LeakyReLU is used as the nonlinear
activation except for the last layer where a SoftMax is used
to obtain normalized skinning weights.
Loss functions. In addition to the loss functions introduced
in the main paper Eqs. (8)-(10), we follow [27] and use
Chamfer Distance and the normal loss to train our model.
The bi-directional Chamfer Distance penalizes the L2
discrepancy between the generated point cloud X = {xi}
and the ground truth Y = {yj}: LCD =
1
|X|
|X|
X
i=1
min
j
xi −yj
2
2 +
1
|Y|
|Y|
X
j=1
min
i
xi −yj
2
2. (11)
The normal loss Ln is the L1 discrepancy between each
point’s predicted unit normal n(xi) and the normal of its
nearest neighbor in the ground truth point cloud:
Ln =
1
|X|
|X|
X
i=1
n(xi) −n(argmin
yj∈Y
d(xi, yj))

1.
(12)
Note that the normal loss is computed based on the near-
est points found by the Chamfer Distance, intuitively it is
more effective when the point locations of the predicted
point cloud roughly matches the ground truth. Therefore we
introduce the normal loss in our training after 100 epochs
when the Chamfer loss plateaus.
The total loss is a weighted sum of all these terms:
L = λCDLCD+λnLn+Lrgl+λLBSLLBS+λreprojLreproj. (13)
The weights are set as λCD = 1e4, λn = 1.0, λLBS =
1.0, λreproj = 5e2. Note that, as discussed in the main
paper, the displacement regularization term Lrgl contains a
per-point adaptive weight λadapt
i
which has an initial value
of 2e3 but decays at each point adaptively according to its
kNN radius. See Sec. B.2 for more details.
Training and Inference. We use query points from the
low-resolution (128×128) UV map to train the coarse stage
MLP, and evaluate it at test-time with denser query locations
(e.g. those from a 256 × 256 UV map) that match the num-
ber of points on the ﬁne stage. Although it is also possible
to train the coarse stage with denser points too, we ﬁnd that
the resulting coarse shape tends to be noisy. Using fewer
points for training prevents the model from being overﬁt
to local details of certain training examples, and yields a
smoother learned coarse shape. The coarse stage is trained
using the Adam optimizer with a learning rate of 3e −4
for 150 epochs, which takes approximately 0.9 hour on a
NVIDIA RTX 6000 GPU.
For the ﬁne stage, we train the displacement network and
the LBS MLP together using Adam with a learning rate of
3e−4 for 250 epochs, which takes approximately 2.5 hours
on a NVIDIA RTX 6000 GPU.
A.2. Baselines
SCANimate.
For the pose-dependent shape prediction
task (main paper Sec. 5.1), we use the ofﬁcial implemen-
tation and hyperparameter settings from SCANimate [43]
9


and train a separate model for each outﬁt in the ReSynth
dataset [27]. Since SCANimate requires watertight meshes
for training the implicit surfaces, we process the dense
point clouds provided in the ReSynth dataset into watertight
meshes using Poisson Surface Reconstruction [19] and then
use this processed data as ground truth to train the model.
During training, we sample 8000 points from the clothed
body meshes dynamically at each iteration.
At test-time, for a fair comparison with the point-based
methods, we ﬁrst extract a surface from the SCANimate’s
implicit predictions using Marching Cubes [24], and then
sample the same number (47,911) of points from the surface
for evaluating the quantitative errors.
POP. We train and evaluate POP also in a subject-speciﬁc
manner to fairly compare with all other methods. Follow-
ing the ofﬁcial implementation, we train and evaluate model
using a ﬁxed set of 47911 query points on the body that cor-
respond to the valid pixels from the 256 × 256 UV-map of
SMPL-X. The reported quantitative errors are averaged over
all the query points.
A.3. Further Details on Experimental Setups
Here we provide more details on scan completion exper-
iment as described in the main paper Sec. 5.3. We scan
subjects wearing challenging clothing (e.g. skirts and very
loose and wrinkly shirts) using a body scanner. The sub-
jects are asked to improvise on several motion sequences,
resulting in few hundreds of frames (typically 200-300) of
raw scan data. We then ﬁt the SMPL-X body model to the
scan data, and train a subject-speciﬁc SkiRT model with the
scan-body pairs using the same procedure and hyperparam-
eters as described in Sec. A. The subjects’ hands and feet
are often largely incomplete throughout the sequence in the
captured raw scans due to the hardware limitations. There-
fore we zero out the displacement predictions for these
parts. At test time, we feed the model with the training bod-
ies. The trained model is expected to reproduce the train-
ing data and outputs the hole-ﬁlled complete scans of point
clouds.
B. Extended Illustrations
B.1. Smoothing the LBS Weight Field
As described in the main paper Sec. 4.1, we ﬁrst fol-
low LoopReg [5] and diffuse LBS weights of the SMPL-
X model to R3 the using nearest neighbor assignment: for
each query point in R3, we ﬁnd its nearest point on the
SMPL-X body surface and assign its LBS weight to the
query point. In practice, the diffused LBS weights are pre-
computed on a regular grid (can also be seen as voxel cen-
ters) with a resolution of 128 × 128 × 128. For an arbi-
trary query point, its LBS weights are acquired via trilinear
interpolation on its neighboring grid points. As shown in
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure B.1:
Visualizing a slice from the pre-diffused
SMPL-X LBS weight ﬁeld.
(a) Diffusion using nearest
neighbor assignment.
(b) Overlay of the SMPL-X body
(color-coded with the body LBS weights) in the nearest-
neighbor-diffused ﬁeld. (c) The smoothed ﬁeld after opti-
mization convergence. The colors in the ﬁelds indicate the
skinning weights to body part with the corresponding color
in (b).
Fig. B.1(a), the nearest neighbor assignment results in clear
discontinuities of the LBS weight distribution in space. A
similar illustration can also be found in Fig. 3 in [5].
To smooth the spatial distributions of the LBS weights,
we use an optimization-based approach. On a high level, for
each grid point, we minimize the discrepancy between its
LBS weights and the average of its 1-ring neighbors. For-
mally, we optimize the LBS weights on all the grid points
with respect to the following energy function:
Esmooth =
M
X
i=1
wpi −
1
|N(pi)|
X
∀qj∈N(pi)
wqj

1,
(14)
where pi denotes a grid point, N(pi) denotes the set of its 1-
ring neighbors, qj is a point in the neighborhood, and M is
the total number of grid points. The optimization effectively
smoothes the boundary discontinuities of the LBS weights
in space, as shown in Fig. B.1(c).
B.2. Point-adaptive Regularization/Upsampling
As described in the main paper Sec. 4.3, both regulariza-
tion (for training) and the point-adaptive upsampling (for
post-processing) are based on the kNN radius li , i.e. the
averaged k-nearest neighbor (we used k=5) distance, per
point. Let µl and σl be the mean and standard deviation
of points’ kNN radius calculated over the entire point set.
During training, if a point’s kNN radius is above a thresh-
old of mean plus two standard deviations, we disable the
regularization on the normal of the displacement for that
point:
λadapt
i
=
(
0
if li > µl + 2σl,
2e3
otherwise.
(15)
We also experimented with more sophisticated policy such
as decaying the per-point weight using an exponential decay
with respect to the kNN radius, but do not observe notice-
able improvements.
10
