Title: Learning to dress 3d people in generative clothing

Learning to Dress 3D People in Generative Clothing
Qianli Ma1, Jinlong Yang1, Anurag Ranjan1,2, Sergi Pujades4, Gerard Pons-Moll5,
Siyu Tang*3, and Michael J. Black1
1Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, T¨ubingen, Germany
2University of T¨ubingen, Germany
3ETH Z¨urich, Switzerland
4Universit´e Grenoble Alpes, Inria, CNRS, Grenoble INP, LJK, France
5Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Saarland Informatics Campus, Germany
{qma, jyang, aranjan, black}@tue.mpg.de
sergi.pujades-rocamora@inria.fr
gpons@mpi-inf.mpg.de
siyu.tang@inf.ethz.ch
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
Figure 1: CAPE model for clothed humans. Given a SMPL body shape and pose (a), CAPE adds clothing by randomly sampling from a learned model
(b, c), can generate different clothing types — shorts in (b, c) vs. long-pants in (d). The generated clothed humans can generalize to diverse body shapes
(e) and body poses (f). Best viewed zoomed-in on screen.
Abstract
Three-dimensional human body models are widely used
in the analysis of human pose and motion. Existing mod-
els, however, are learned from minimally-clothed 3D scans
and thus do not generalize to the complexity of dressed peo-
ple in common images and videos. Additionally, current
models lack the expressive power needed to represent the
complex non-linear geometry of pose-dependent clothing
shapes. To address this, we learn a generative 3D mesh
model of clothed people from 3D scans with varying pose
and clothing. Speciﬁcally, we train a conditional Mesh-
VAE-GAN to learn the clothing deformation from the SMPL
body model, making clothing an additional term in SMPL.
Our model is conditioned on both pose and clothing type,
giving the ability to draw samples of clothing to dress differ-
ent body shapes in a variety of styles and poses. To preserve
wrinkle detail, our Mesh-VAE-GAN extends patchwise dis-
criminators to 3D meshes. Our model, named CAPE, rep-
resents global shape and ﬁne local structure, effectively ex-
tending the SMPL body model to clothing. To our knowl-
edge, this is the ﬁrst generative model that directly dresses
3D human body meshes and generalizes to different poses.
The model, code and data are available for research pur-
poses at https://cape.is.tue.mpg.de.
1. Introduction
Existing generative human models [6, 23, 35, 40] suc-
cessfully capture the statistics of human shape and pose de-
formation, but still miss an important component: clothing.
This leads to several problems in various applications. For
example, when body models are used to generate synthetic
training data [21, 46, 47, 53], the minimal body geome-
try results in a signiﬁcant domain gap between synthetic
and real images of humans.
Deep learning methods re-
construct human shape from images, based on minimally
dressed human models [5, 24, 27, 28, 31, 38, 40, 41]. Al-
though the body pose matches the image observation, the
minimal body geometry does not match clothed humans in
∗Work was done when S. Tang was at MPI-IS and University of T¨ubingen.
arXiv:1907.13615v3  [cs.CV]  22 May 2020


most cases. These problems motivate the need for a para-
metric clothed human model.
Our goal is to create a generative model of clothed hu-
man bodies that is low-dimensional, easy to pose, differ-
entiable, can represent different clothing types on different
body shapes and poses, and produces geometrically plau-
sible results. To achieve this, we extend SMPL [35] and
factorize clothing shape from the undressed body, treating
clothing as an additive displacement in the canonical pose
(see Fig. 2). The learned clothing layer is compatible with
the SMPL body model by design, enabling easy re-posing
and animation. The mapping from a given body shape and
pose to clothing shape is one-to-many. However, existing
regression-based clothing models [17, 59] produce deter-
ministic results that fail to capture the stochastic nature of
clothing deformations. In contrast, we formulate clothing
modeling as a probabilistic generation task: for a single
pose and body shape, multiple clothing deformations can be
sampled. Our model, called CAPE for “Clothed Auto Per-
son Encoding”, is conditioned on clothing types and body
poses, so that it captures different types of clothing, and can
generate pose-dependent deformations, which are important
for realistically modeling clothing.
We illustrate the key elements of our model in Fig. 1.
Given a SMPL body shape, pose and clothing type, CAPE
can generate different structures of clothing by sampling a
learned latent space. The resulting clothing layer plausibly
adapts to different body shapes and poses.
Technical approach.
We represent clothing as a dis-
placement layer using a graph that inherits the topol-
ogy of SMPL. Each node in this graph represents the 3-
dimensional offset vector from its corresponding vertex
on the underlying body. To learn a generative model for
such graphs, we build a graph convolutional neural network
(Sec. 4), under the framework of a VAE-GAN [7, 30], us-
ing graph convolutions [11] and mesh sampling [45] as the
backbone layers. This addresses the problem with exist-
ing generative models designed for 3D meshes of human
bodies [33, 54] or faces [45] that tend to produce over-
smoothed results; such smoothing is problematic for cloth-
ing where local details such as wrinkles matter. Speciﬁcally,
the GAN [16] module in our system encourages visually
plausible wrinkles. We model the GAN using a patch-wise
discriminator for mesh-like graphs, and show that it effec-
tively improves the quality of the generated ﬁne structures.
Dataset. We introduce a dataset of 4D captured people per-
forming a variety of pose sequences, in different types of
clothing (Sec. 5). Our dataset consists of over 80K frames
of 8 male and 3 female subjects captured using a 4D scan-
ner. We use this dataset to train our network, resulting in a
parametric generative model of the clothing layer.
Versatility. CAPE is designed to be “plug-and-play” for
many applications that already use SMPL. Dressing SMPL
with CAPE yields 3D meshes of people in clothing, which
can be used for several applications such as generating
training data, parametrizing body pose in a deep network,
having a clothing “prior”, or as part of a generative analysis-
by-synthesis approach [21, 47, 53]. We demonstrate this on
the task of image ﬁtting by extending SMPLify [9] with our
model. We show that using CAPE together with SMPLify
can improve the quality of reconstructed human bodies in
clothing.
In summary, our key contributions are: (1) We propose
a probabilistic formulation of clothing modeling. (2) Un-
der this formulation, we learn a conditional Mesh-VAE-
GAN that captures both global shape and local detail of a
mesh, with controlled conditioning based on human pose
and clothing types.
(3) The learned model can generate
pose-dependent deformations of clothing, and generalizes
to a variety of garments. (4) We augment the SMPL 3D
human body model with our clothing model, and show
an application of the enhanced “clothed-SMPL”. (5) We
contribute a dataset of 4D scans of clothed humans per-
forming a variety of motion sequences. Our dataset, code,
and trained model are available for research purposes at
https://cape.is.tue.mpg.de.
2. Related Work
The capture, reconstruction and modeling of clothing has
been widely studied. Table 1 shows recent methods catego-
rized into two major classes: (1) reconstruction and capture
methods, and (2) parametric models, detailed as follows.
Reconstructing 3D humans.
Reconstruction of 3D hu-
mans from 2D images and videos is a classical computer
vision problem. Most approaches [9, 18, 24, 27, 28, 31,
38, 40, 50] output 3D body meshes from images, but not
clothing. This ignores image evidence that may be use-
ful. To reconstruct clothed bodies, methods use volumet-
ric [36, 48, 52, 61] or bi-planar depth representations [12]
to model the body and garments as a whole. We refer to
these as Group 1 in Table 1. While these methods deal with
arbitrary clothing topology and preserve a high level of de-
tail, the reconstructed clothed body is not parametric, which
means the pose, shape, and clothing of the reconstruction
can not be controlled or animated.
Another group of methods are based on SMPL [1, 2, 3, 4,
8, 62]. They represent clothing as an offset layer from the
underlying body as proposed in ClothCap [43]. We refer
to these approaches as Group 2 in Table 1. These meth-
ods can change the pose and shape of the reconstruction
using the deformation model of SMPL. This assumes cloth-
ing deforms like an undressed human body; i.e. that cloth-
ing shape and wrinkles do not change as a function of pose.
We also use a body-to-cloth offset representation to learn


Table 1: Selection of related methods. Two main 3D clothing method classes exist: (1) Image-based reconstruction and capture methods, and (2) Clothing
models that predict deformation as a function of pose. Within each class, methods differ according to the criteria in the columns.
Method Class
Methods
Parametric
Pose-dep.
Full-body
Clothing
Captured
Code
Probabilistic
Model
Clothing
Clothing
Wrinkles
Data∗
Public
Sampling
Image
Group 1 †
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Reconstruction
Group 2 ‡
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Capture
ClothCap [43]
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
DeepWrinkles [29]
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
No
No
Yang et al. [59]
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
No
No
Clothing
Wang et al. [56]
Yes
No
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Models
DRAPE [17]
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
Sanesteban et al. [49]
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
GarNet [19]
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
Ours
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
* As opposed to simulated / synthetic data.
† Group 1: BodyNet [52], DeepHuman [61], SiCloPe [36], PIFu [48], MouldingHumans [12].
‡ Group 2: Octopus [1], MGN [8], Tex2Shape [4].
our model, but critically, we learn a neural function map-
ping from pose to multi-modal clothing offset deformations.
Hence, our work differs from these methods in that we learn
a parametric model of how clothing deforms with pose.
Parametric models for 3D bodies and clothes. Statisti-
cal 3D human body models learned from 3D body scans,
[6, 23, 35, 40] capture body shape and pose and are an
important building block for multiple applications. Most
of the time, however, people are dressed and these models
do not represent clothing. In addition, clothes deform as
we move, producing changing wrinkles at multiple spatial
scales. While clothing models learned from real data ex-
ist, few generalize to new poses. For example, Neophytou
and Hilton [37] learn a layered garment model on top of
SCAPE [6] from dynamic sequences, but generalization to
novel poses is not demonstrated. Yang et al. [59] train a neu-
ral network to regress a PCA-based representation of cloth-
ing, but show generalization on the same sequence or on the
same subject. L¨ahner et al. [29] learn a garment-speciﬁc
pose-deformation model by regressing low-frequency PCA
components and high frequency normal maps. While the
visual quality is good, the model is garment-speciﬁc and
does not provide a solution for full-body clothing. Simi-
larly, Alldieck et al. [4] use displacement maps with a UV-
parametrization to represent surface geometry, but the result
is only static. Wang et al. [56] allow manipulation of cloth-
ing with sketches in a static pose. The Adam model [23] can
be considered clothed but the shape is very smooth and not
pose-dependent. Clothing models have been learned from
physics simulation of clothing [17, 19, 39, 49], but visual
ﬁdelity is limited by the quality of the simulations. Further-
more, the above methods are regressors that produce single
point estimates. In contrast, our model is generative, which
allows us to sample clothing.
A conceptually different approach infers the parameters
of a physical clothing model from 3D scan sequences [51].
This generalizes to novel poses, but the inference problem
is difﬁcult and, unlike our model, the resulting physics sim-
ulator is not differentiable with respect to the parameters.
Generative models on 3D meshes. Our model predicts
clothing displacements on the graph deﬁned by the SMPL
mesh using graph convolutions [10]. There is an extensive
recent literature on methods and applications of graph con-
volutions [11, 26, 33, 45, 54]. Most relevant here, Ranjan
et al. [45] learn a convolutional autoencoder using graph
convolutions [11] with mesh down- and up-sampling layers
[13]. Although it works well for faces, the mesh sampling
layer makes it difﬁcult to capture the local details, which
are key in clothing. In our work, we capture local details by
extending the PatchGAN [22] architecture to 3D meshes.
3. Additive Clothed Human Model
To model clothed human bodies, we factorize them into
two parts: the minimally-clothed body, and a clothing layer
represented as displacements from the body. This enables
us to naturally extend SMPL to a class of clothing types by
treating clothing as an additional additive shape term. Since
SMPL is in wide use, our goal is to extend it in a way that
is consistent with current uses, making it effectively a “drop
in” replacement for SMPL.
3.1. Dressing SMPL
SMPL [35] is a generative model of human bodies that
factors the surface of the body into shape (β) and pose (θ)
parameters. As shown in Fig. 2 (a), (b), the architecture of
SMPL starts with a triangulated template mesh, ¯T, in rest
pose, deﬁned by N = 6890 vertices. Given shape and pose
parameters (β, θ), 3D offsets are added to the template, cor-
responding to shape-dependent deformations (BS(β)) and
pose dependent deformations (BP (θ)). The resulting mesh
is then posed using the skinning function W. Formally:
T(β, θ)
=
¯T + BS(β) + BP (θ)
(1)
M(β, θ)
=
W(T(β, θ), J(β), θ, W)
(2)


(a) ¯T
(b) T (β)= ¯T +BS (β)
(c) T (β,θ)=T (β)+BP(θ)
(d) Tclo =T (β,θ)+Sclo(z,θ,c)
(e) W (Tclo,J(β),θ,W)
Figure 2: Additive clothed human model. Our contribution is highlighted with yellow background. Following SMPL, our model (a) starts from a template
mesh, and linearly adds offsets contributed by (b) individual body shape β, and (c) pose θ; note the deformation on the hips and feet caused by the ballet
pose. (d) We further add a clothing layer parametrized by pose θ, clothing type c and a clothing shape variable z. (e) The vertices are then posed using the
skinning equation of SMPL.
where the blend skinning function W(·) rotates the rest pose
vertices T around the 3D joints J (computed from β), lin-
early smoothes them with the blend weights W, and returns
the posed vertices M. The pose θ ∈R3×(23+1) is repre-
sented by a vector of relative 3D rotations of the 23 joints
and the global rotation in axis-angle representation.
SMPL adds linear deformation layers to an initial body
shape. Following this, we deﬁne clothing as an extra offset
layer from the body and add it on top of the SMPL mesh,
Fig. 2 (d). In this work, we parametrize the clothing layer
by the body pose θ, clothing type c and a low-dimensional
latent variable z that encodes clothing shape and structure.
Let Sclo(z, θ, c) be the clothing displacement layer. We
extend Eq. (1) to a clothed body template in the rest pose:
Tclo(β, θ, c, z) = T(β, θ) + Sclo(z, θ, c).
(3)
Note that the clothing displacements, Sclo(z, θ, c), are pose-
dependent. The ﬁnal clothed template is then posed with
the SMPL skinning function, Eq. (2):
M(β, θ, c, z) = W(Tclo(β, θ, c, z), J(β), θ, W).
(4)
This differs from simply applying blend skinning with ﬁxed
displacements, as done in e.g. [1, 8]. Here, we train the
model such that pose-dependent clothing displacements in
the template pose are correct once posed by blend skinning.
3.2. Clothing representation
Vertex displacements are not a physical model for cloth-
ing and cannot represent all types of garments, but this ap-
proach achieves a balance between expressiveness and sim-
plicity, and has been widely used in deformation model-
ing [17], 3D clothing capture [43] and recent work that re-
constructs clothed humans from images [1, 8, 62].
The displacement layer is a graph Gd = (Vd, Ed) that in-
herits the SMPL topology: the edges Ed = ESMPL. Vd ∈
R3×N is the set of vertices, and the feature on each ver-
tex is the 3-dimensional offset vector, (dx, dy, dz), from its
corresponding vertex on the underlying body mesh.
We train our model on 3D scans of people in clothing.
From data pairs (Vclothed, Vminimal) we compute displace-
ments, where Vclothed stands for the vertices of a clothed hu-
man mesh, and Vminimal the vertices of a minimally-clothed
mesh. Therefore, we ﬁrst scan subjects in both clothed and
minimally-clothed conditions, then use the SMPL model
with free deformation [1, 60] to register the scans. As a
result, we obtain SMPL meshes capturing the geometry of
the scans, the corresponding pose parameters, and vertices
of the unposed meshes1. For each (Vclothed, Vminimal) pair, the
displacements are then calculated as Vd = Vclothed−Vminimal,
where the subtraction is performed per-vertex along the fea-
ture dimension. Ideally, Vd has non-zero values only on
body parts covered with clothes.
In summary, CAPE extends the SMPL body model to
clothed bodies. Compared to volumetric representations of
clothed people [36, 48, 52, 61], our combination of the body
model and the garment layer is superior in the ease of re-
posing and garment retargeting: the former uses the same
blend skinning as the body model, while the latter is a sim-
ple addition of the displacements to a minimally-clothed
body shape. In contrast to similar models that also dress
SMPL with offsets [1, 8], our garment layer is parametrized,
low-dimensional, and pose-dependent.
4. CAPE
Our clothing term Sclo(z, θ, c) in Eq. (3) is a function of
z, a code in a learned low-dimensional latent space that en-
codes the shape and structure of clothing, body pose θ, and
clothing type c. The function outputs the clothing displace-
ment graph Gd as described in Sec. 3.2. We parametrize
this function using a graph convolutional neural network
(Graph-CNN) as a VAE-GAN framework [16, 25, 30].
4.1. Network architecture
As shown in Fig. 3, our model consists of a generator
G with an encoder-decoder architecture and a discriminator
D. We also use auxiliary networks C1, C2 to handle the
conditioning. The network is differentiable and is trained
end-to-end.
1We follow SMPL and use the T-pose as the zero-pose. For the mathemat-
ical details of registration and unposing, we refer the reader to [60].


(𝑑!, 𝑑",𝑑#)
 𝑧 𝜃 𝑐
 𝜃 𝑐
 𝜃 𝑐
 𝜃 𝑐
Variational Autoencoder - G
Discriminator - D
Real/Fake 
(patchwise)
 
 𝜃 𝑐
Downsampling
Upsampling
Fully Connected
 𝜃
 𝑐
Residual Block
(a)
(b)
Figure 3: Overview of our method. (a) Computing displacements from scan data (Sec. 3.2) by subtracting the minimal body shape from clothed body mesh
in the unposed space. (b) Schematic of our network architecture.
For simplicity, we use the following notation in this sec-
tion. x: the vertices Vd of the input displacement graph; ˆx:
vertices of the reconstructed graph; θ and c: the pose and
clothing type condition vector; z: the latent code.
Graph generator. We build the graph generator following a
VAE-GAN framework. During training, an encoder Enc(·)
takes in the displacement x, extract its features through mul-
tiple graph convolutional layers, and maps it to the low-
dimensional latent code z. A decoder is trained to recon-
struct the input graph ˆx = Dec(z) from z. Both the en-
coder and decoder are feed-forward neural networks built
with mesh convolutional layers. Linear layers are used at
the end of the encoder and the beginning of the decoder.
The architecture is shown in the supplemental materials.
Stacking graph convolution layers causes a loss of local
features [32] in the deeper layers. This is undesirable for
clothing generation because ﬁne details, corresponding to
wrinkles, are likely to disappear. Therefore, we improve
the standard graph convolution layers with residual connec-
tions, which enable the use of low-level features from the
layer input if necessary.
At test time, the encoder is not needed. Instead, z is sam-
pled from the Gaussian prior distribution, and the decoder
serves as the graph generator: G(z) = Dec(z). We detail
different use cases below.
Patchwise discriminator. To further enhance ﬁne details
in the reconstructions, we introduce a patchwise discrim-
inator D for graphs, which has shown success in the im-
age domain [22, 63]. Instead of looking at the entire gen-
erated graph, the discriminator only classiﬁes whether a
graph patch is real or fake based on its local structure. In-
tuitively this encourages the discriminator to only focus on
ﬁne details, and the global shape is taken care of by the
reconstruction loss. We implement the graph patchwise-
discriminator using four graph convolution-downsampling
blocks [45]. We add a discriminative real / fake loss for
each of the output vertices. This enables the discriminator
to capture a patch of neighboring nodes in the reconstructed
graph and classify them as real / fake (see Fig. 3).
Conditional model. We condition the network with body
pose θ and clothing type c. The SMPL pose parameters are
in axis-angle representation, and are difﬁcult for the neu-
ral network to learn [28, 31]. Therefore, following previous
work [28, 31], we transform the pose parameters into ro-
tational matrices using the Rodrigues equation. The cloth-
ing types are discrete by nature, and we represent them us-
ing one-hot labels. Both conditions are ﬁrst passed through
a small fully-connected embedding network, C1(θ), C2(c),
respectively, so as to balance the dimensionality of learned
graph features and of the condition features. We also exper-
iment with different ways of conditioning the mesh gener-
ator: concatenation in the latent space; appending the con-
dition features to the graph features at all nodes in the gen-
erator; and the combination of the two. We ﬁnd that the
combined strategy works better in terms of network capa-
bility and the effect of conditioning.
4.2. Losses and learning
For reconstruction, we use an L1 loss over the vertices of
the mesh x, because it encourages less smoothing compared
to L2, given by
Lrecon = Ex∼p(x),z∼q(z|x) [∥G(z, θ, c) −x∥1] .
(5)
Furthermore, we apply a loss on the mesh edges to en-
courage the generation of wrinkles instead of smooth sur-
faces. Let e be an edge in the set of edges, E, of the ground
truth graph, and ˆe the corresponding edge in the gener-
ated graph. We penalize the mismatch of all corresponding
edges by
Ledge = Ee∈E, ˆe∈ˆE [∥e −ˆe∥2] .
(6)
We also apply a KL divergence loss between the distri-
bution of latent codes and the Gaussian prior
LKL = Ex∼p(x) [KL(q(z|x) ∥N(0, I))] .
(7)
Moreover, the generator and the discriminator are trained
using an adversarial loss
LGAN = Ex∼p(x) [log(D(x, θ, c))] +
Ez∼q(z|x) [log(1 −D(G(z, θ, c)))] ,
(8)


where G tries to minimize this loss against the D that aims
to maximize it.
The overall objective is a weighted sum of these loss
terms given by
L = Lrecon + γedgeLedge + γklLKL + γganLGAN.
(9)
Training details are provided in the supplemental materials.
5. CAPE Dataset
We build a dataset of 3D clothing by capturing temporal
sequences of 3D human body scans with a high-resolution
body scanner (3dMD LLC, Atlanta, GA). Approximately
80K 3D scan frames are captured at 60 FPS, and a mesh
with SMPL model topology is registered to each scan to
obtain surface correspondences. We also scanned the sub-
jects in a minimally-clothed condition to obtain an accurate
estimate of their body shape under clothing. We extract the
clothing as displacements from the minimally-clothed body
as described in Sec. 3.2. Noisy frames and failed registra-
tions are removed through manual inspection.
The dataset consists of 8 male subjects and 3 female sub-
jects, performing a wide range of motions. The subjects
gave informed written consent to participate and to release
the data for research purposes. “Clothing type” in this work
refers to the 4 types of full-body outﬁts, namely shortlong:
short-sleeve upper body clothing and long lower body cloth-
ing; and similarly shortshort, longshort, longlong. These
outﬁts comprise 8 types of common garments. We refer to
the supplementary material for the list of garments, further
details, and examples from the dataset.
Compared to existing datasets of 3D clothed humans, our
dataset provides captured data and alignments of SMPL to
the scans, separates the clothing from body, and provides
accurate, captured ground truth body shape under clothing.
For each subject and outﬁt, our dataset contains large pose
variations, which induces a wide variety of wrinkle patterns.
Since our dataset of 3D meshes has a consistent topology,
it can be used for the quantitative evaluation of different
Graph-CNN architectures. The dataset is available for re-
search purposes at https://cape.is.tue.mpg.de.
6. Experiments
We ﬁrst show the representation capability of our model
and then demonstrate the model’s ability to generate new
examples by probabilistic sampling. We then show an ap-
plication to human pose and shape estimation.
6.1. Representation power
3D mesh auto-encoding errors. We use the reconstruc-
tion accuracy to measure the capability of our VAE-based
model for geometry encoding and preserving. We compare
with a recent convolutional mesh autoencoder, CoMA [45],
and a linear (PCA) model. We compare to both the original
CoMA with a 4× downsampling (denoted as “CoMA-4”),
and without downsampling (denoted “CoMA-1”) to study
the effect of downsampling on over-smoothing. We use the
same latent space dimension nz = 18 (number of princi-
pal components in the case of PCA) and hyper-parameter
settings, where applicable, for all models.
Table 2 shows the per-vertex Euclidean error when using
our network to reconstruct the clothing displacement graphs
from a held-out test set in our CAPE dataset. The model is
trained and evaluated on male and female data separately.
Body parts such as head, ﬁngers, toes, hands and feet are
excluded from the accuracy computation, as they are not
covered with clothing.
Our model outperforms the baselines in the auto-
encoding task; additionally, the reconstructed shape from
our model is probabilistic and pose-dependent. Note that,
CoMA here is a deterministic auto-encoder with a focus on
reconstruction. Although the reconstruction performance of
PCA is on par with our method on male data, PCA can not
be used directly in the inference phase with a pose parame-
ter as input. Furthermore, PCA assumes a Gaussian distri-
bution of the data, which does not hold for complex clothing
deformations. Our method addresses both of these issues.
Fig. 4 shows a qualitative comparison of the methods.
PCA keeps wrinkles and boundaries, but the rising hem on
the left side disappears. CoMA-1 and CoMA-4 are able
to capture global correlation, but the wrinkles tend to be
smoothed. By incorporating all the key components, our
model manages to model both local structures and global
correlations more accurately than the other methods.
Ablation study.
We remove key components from our
model while keeping all the others, and evaluate the model
performance; see Table 2. We observe that the discrimi-
nator, residual block and edge loss all play important roles
in the model performance. Comparing the performance of
CoMA-4 and CoMA-1, we ﬁnd that the mesh the downsam-
pling layer causes a loss of ﬁdelity. However, even without
any spatial downsampling, CoMA-1 still underperforms our
model. This shows the beneﬁts of adding the discriminator,
residual block, and edge loss in our model.
Table 2: Per-vertex auto-encoding error in millimeters. Upper section:
comparison with baselines; lower section: ablation study.
Male
Female
Methods
Error mean
median
Error mean
median
PCA
5.65 ± 4.81
4.30
4.82 ± 3.82
3.78
CoMA-1
6.23 ± 5.45
4.66
4.69 ± 3.85
3.61
CoMA-4
6.87 ± 5.62
5.29
4.86 ± 3.96
3.75
Ours
5.54 ± 5.09
4.03
4.21 ± 3.76
3.08
Ablated Components
Error mean
median
Error mean
median
Discriminator
5.65 ± 5.18
4.11
4.31 ± 3.78
3.18
Res-block
5.60 ± 5.21
4.05
4.27 ± 3.76
3.15
Edge loss
5.93 ± 5.40
4.32
4.32 ± 3.78
3.19


Ground 
Truth
PCA
COMA-4
COMA-1
w/o Discr.
w/o edge 
loss
CAPE 
full model
Figure 4: Example of reconstruction by the baselines, ablated version of
our model, and our full model. Pay attention to the hem and wrinkles on
upper back. Our model is able to recover both long-range correlations and
local details. Best viewed zoomed-in on screen.
6.2. Conditional generation of clothing
As a generative model, CAPE can be sampled and gen-
erates new data. The model has three parameters: z, c, θ
(see Eq. (3)). By sampling one of them while keeping the
other two ﬁxed, we show how the conditioning affects the
generated clothing shape.
Sampling. Fig. 5 presents the sampled clothing dressed on
unseen bodies, in a variety of poses that are not used in
training. For each subject, we ﬁx the pose θ and clothing
type c, and sample z several times to generate varied cloth-
ing shapes. The sampling trick in [14] is used. Here we
only show untextured rendering to highlight the variation
in the generated geometry. As CAPE inherits the SMPL
topology, the generated clothed body meshes are compati-
ble with all existing SMPL texture maps. See supplemental
materials for a comparison between a CAPE sample and a
SMPL sample rendered with the same texture.
As shown in the ﬁgure, our model manages to capture
long-range correlations within a mesh, such as the elevated
hem for a subject with raised arms, and the lateral wrinkle
on the back with raised arms. The model also synthesizes
local details such as wrinkles in the armpit area, and bound-
aries at cuffs and collars.
Pose-dependent clothing deformation. Another practical
use case of CAPE is to animate an existing clothed body.
This corresponds to ﬁxing the clothing shape variable z and
clothing type c, and reposing the body by changing θ. The
challenge here is to have a clothing shape that is consistent
across poses, yet deforms plausibly. We demonstrate the
pose-dependent effect on a test pose in Fig. 6. The differ-
ence of the clothing layer between the two poses is calcu-
lated in the canonical pose, and shown with color coding.
The result shows that the clothing type is consistent while
local deformation changes along with pose. We refer to the
supplemental video for a comparison with traditional rig-
and-skinning methods that use ﬁxed clothing offsets.
User study of generated examples. To test the realism of
the generated results from our method, we performed a user
study on Amazon Mechanical Turk (AMT). We dress vir-
tual avatars in 3D and render them into front-view images.
Following the protocol from [22], raters are presented with
a series of “real vs fake” trials. On each trial, the rater is
presented with a “real” mesh render (randomly picked from
our dataset), and a “fake” render (generated by our model),
shown side-by-side. The raters are asked to pick the one that
they think is real. Each pair of renderings is evaluated by 10
raters. More strictly than [22], we present both real and fake
renderings simultaneously, do not set a time limit for raters
and allow zoom-in for detailed comparison. In this setting,
the best score that a method can obtain is 50%, meaning that
the real and fake examples are indistinguishable.
We evaluate with two test cases. In test case 1, we ﬁx the
clothing type to be “shortlong” (the most common cloth-
ing type in training), and generate 300 clothed body meshes
with various poses for the evaluation. In test case 2, we ﬁx
the pose to be an A-pose (the most frequent pose in train-
ing), and sample 100 examples per clothing type for evalu-
ation. On average, in the direct comparison with real data,
our synthesized data “fools” participants 35.1% ± 15.7%
and 38.7% ± 16.5% of the time respectively (i.e. these par-
ticipants labeled our result as “real”).
6.3. Image ﬁtting
CAPE is fully differentiable with respect to the clothing
shape variable z, body pose θ and clothing type c. There-
fore, it can also be used in optimization frameworks. We
show an application of CAPE on the task of reconstruct-
ing a body mesh from a single image, by entending the
optimization-based method, SMPLify [9]. Assuming c is
known, we dress the minimally-clothed output mesh from
SMPLify using CAPE, project it back to the image using
a differentiable renderer [20] and optimize for β, θ, z, with
respect to the silhouette discrepancy.
We evaluate our image ﬁtting pipeline on renderings
of 120 randomly selected unseen test examples from the
CAPE dataset. To compare, we measure the reconstruc-
tion error of SMPLify and our results against ground truth
meshes using mean square vertex error (MSE). To eliminate
the error introduced by the ambiguity of human scale and
distance to the camera, we optimize the global scaling and
translation of predictions for both methods on each test sam-
ple. A mask is applied to exclude error in the non-clothed
regions such as head, hands and feet. We report the errors
of both methods in Table 3. Our model performs 18% better
than SMPLify due to its ability to capture clothing shape.
More details about the objective function, experimental
setup and qualitative results of the image ﬁtting experiment
Table 3: Vertex MSE of image ﬁtting results measured in meters.
Method
SMPLify [9]
Ours
Per-vertex MSE
0.0223
0.0189


Figure 5: Clothing sampled and generated from our CAPE model applied to four unseen body shapes (green colored) with different poses. Each body in
green is followed by ﬁve blue examples (generated by sampling the latent vector z) showing different versions of the same outﬁt type. The four groups are
wearing outﬁt types “longshort”, “longlong”, “shortlong” and “shortshort”, respectively. Best viewed zoomed-in on screen.
31.0 mm
0.0 mm
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 6: Pose-dependent clothing shape. (a) and (b): two clothing shapes
generated from CAPE, with different pose parameters. (c): color-coded
difference of the offset clothing layers in (a) and (b), in the canonical pose.
are provided in supplementary materials.
Furthermore, once a clothed human is reconstructed
from the image, our model can repose and animate it, as
well as change the subject’s clothes by re-sampling z or
clothing type c. This shows the potential for several ap-
plications. We show examples in the supplemental video.
7. Conclusions, Limitations, Future Work
We have introduced a novel graph-CNN-based genera-
tive shape model that enables us to condition, sample, and
preserve ﬁne shape detail in 3D meshes. We use this to
model clothing deformations from a 3D body mesh and
condition the latent space on body pose and clothing type.
The training data represents 3D displacements from the
SMPL body model for varied clothing and poses. This de-
sign means that our generative model is compatible with
SMPL in that clothing is an additional additive term ap-
plied to the SMPL template mesh. This makes it possi-
ble to sample clothing, dress SMPL with it, and then an-
imate the body with pose-dependent clothing wrinkles. A
clothed version of SMPL has wide applicability in computer
vision. As shown, we can apply it to ﬁtting the body to im-
ages of clothed humans. Another application would use the
model to generate training data of 3D clothed people to train
regression-based pose-estimation methods.
There are a few limitations of our approach that point to
future work. First, CAPE inherits the limitation of the off-
set representation for clothing: (1) Garments such as skirts
and open jackets differ from the body topology and can-
not be trivially represented by offsets. Consequently, when
ﬁtting CAPE to images containing such garments, it could
fail to explain the image evidence; see discussions on the
skirt example in the supplementary material. (2) Mittens
and shoes: they can technically be modeled by the offsets,
but their geometry is sufﬁciently different from ﬁngers and
toes, making this impractical. A multi-layer model can po-
tentially overcome these limitations. Second, the level of
geometric details that CAPE can achieve is upper-bounded
by the mesh resolution of SMPL. To produce ﬁner wrinkles,
one can resort to higher resolution meshes or bump maps.
Third, while our generated clothing depends on pose, it does
not depend on dynamics. This does not cause severe prob-
lem for most slow motions but does not generalize to faster
motions. Future work will address modeling clothing de-
formation on temporal sequence and dynamics.
Acknowledgements: We thank Daniel Scharstein for revisions of the
manuscript, Joachim Tesch for the help with Blender rendering, Vassilis
Choutas for the help with image ﬁtting experiments, and Pavel Karasik for
the help with AMT evaluation. We thank Tsvetelina Alexiadis and An-
drea Keller for collecting data. We thank Partha Ghosh, Timo Bolkart and
Yan Zhang for useful discussions. Q. Ma and S. Tang acknowledge fund-
ing by Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG, German Research Foun-
dation) - 276693517 SFB 1233. G. Pons-Moll is funded by the Emmy
Noether Programme, Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft - 409792180.
Disclosure: MJB has received research gift funds from Intel, Nvidia,
Adobe, Facebook, and Amazon. While MJB is a part-time employee of
Amazon, his research was performed solely at, and funded solely by, MPI.


References
[1] Thiemo Alldieck, Marcus Magnor, Bharat Lal Bhatnagar, Christian
Theobalt, and Gerard Pons-Moll. Learning to reconstruct people in
clothing from a single RGB camera. In The IEEE Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2019. 2, 3, 4
[2] Thiemo Alldieck, Marcus Magnor, Weipeng Xu, Christian Theobalt,
and Gerard Pons-Moll.
Detailed human avatars from monocular
video. In International Conference on 3D Vision (3DV), 2018. 2
[3] Thiemo Alldieck, Marcus Magnor, Weipeng Xu, Christian Theobalt,
and Gerard Pons-Moll.
Video based reconstruction of 3D people
models. In The IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition (CVPR), 2018. 2
[4] Thiemo Alldieck, Gerard Pons-Moll, Christian Theobalt, and Marcus
Magnor. Tex2Shape: Detailed full human body geometry from a
single image. In The IEEE International Conference on Computer
Vision (ICCV), 2019. 2, 3
[5] Rıza Alp G¨uler, Natalia Neverova, and Iasonas Kokkinos. Dense-
pose: Dense human pose estimation in the wild. In The IEEE Con-
ference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2018.
1
[6] Dragomir Anguelov, Praveen Srinivasan, Daphne Koller, Sebastian
Thrun, Jim Rodgers, and James Davis. SCAPE: shape completion
and animation of people. In ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG),
volume 24, pages 408–416. ACM, 2005. 1, 3
[7] Jianmin Bao, Dong Chen, Fang Wen, Houqiang Li, and Gang
Hua. CVAE-GAN: ﬁne-grained image generation through asymmet-
ric training.
In The IEEE International Conference on Computer
Vision (ICCV), 2017. 2
[8] Bharat Lal Bhatnagar, Garvita Tiwari, Christian Theobalt, and Ger-
ard Pons-Moll. Multi-Garment Net: Learning to Dress 3D People
from Images. In The IEEE International Conference on Computer
Vision (ICCV), 2019. 2, 3, 4
[9] Federica Bogo, Angjoo Kanazawa, Christoph Lassner, Peter Gehler,
Javier Romero, and Michael J. Black. Keep it SMPL: Automatic
estimation of 3D human pose and shape from a single image. In
European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV). Springer, 2016.
2, 7, 3, 4
[10] Joan Bruna, Wojciech Zaremba, Arthur Szlam, and Yann Lecun.
Spectral networks and locally connected networks on graphs. In In-
ternational Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2014.
3
[11] Micha¨el Defferrard, Xavier Bresson, and Pierre Vandergheynst. Con-
volutional neural networks on graphs with fast localized spectral ﬁl-
tering. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pages
3844–3852, 2016. 2, 3
[12] Valentin Gabeur, Jean-S´ebastien Franco, Xavier MARTIN, Cordelia
Schmid, and Gregory Rogez. Moulding Humans: Non-parametric
3D Human Shape Estimation from Single Images. In The IEEE In-
ternational Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), 2019. 2, 3
[13] Michael Garland and Paul S Heckbert. Surface simpliﬁcation using
quadric error metrics. In Proceedings of the 24th annual conference
on Computer graphics and interactive techniques, pages 209–216.
ACM Press/Addison-Wesley Publishing Co., 1997. 3
[14] P. Ghosh, M. S. M. Sajjadi, A. Vergari, M. J. Black, and B.
Sch¨olkopf. From variational to deterministic autoencoders. In In-
ternational Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2020.
7
[15] Ke Gong, Xiaodan Liang, Yicheng Li, Yimin Chen, Ming Yang, and
Liang Lin. Instance-level human parsing via part grouping network.
In The European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV). Springer,
2018. 2
[16] Ian Goodfellow, Jean Pouget-Abadie, Mehdi Mirza, Bing Xu, David
Warde-Farley, Sherjil Ozair, Aaron Courville, and Yoshua Bengio.
Generative adversarial nets. In Advances in neural information pro-
cessing systems, pages 2672–2680, 2014. 2, 4
[17] Peng Guan, Loretta Reiss, David A Hirshberg, Alexander Weiss, and
Michael J Black. DRAPE: DRessing Any PErson. ACM Transac-
tions on Graphics (TOG), 31(4):35–1, 2012. 2, 3, 4
[18] Peng Guan, Alexander Weiss, Alexandru O Balan, and Michael J
Black. Estimating human shape and pose from a single image. In The
IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), 2009. 2
[19] Erhan Gundogdu, Victor Constantin, Amrollah Seifoddini, Minh
Dang, Mathieu Salzmann, and Pascal Fua. GarNet: A two-stream
network for fast and accurate 3D cloth draping. In The IEEE Inter-
national Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), 2019. 3
[20] Paul Henderson and Vittorio Ferrari. Learning single-image 3D re-
construction by generative modelling of shape, pose and shading.
International Journal of Computer Vision (IJCV), 2019. 7
[21] David T. Hoffmann, Dimitrios Tzionas, Michael J. Black, and Siyu
Tang. Learning to train with synthetic humans. In German Confer-
ence on Pattern Recognition (GCPR), 2019. 1, 2
[22] Phillip Isola, Jun-Yan Zhu, Tinghui Zhou, and Alexei A Efros.
Image-to-image translation with conditional adversarial networks. In
The IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
(CVPR), 2017. 3, 5, 7
[23] Hanbyul Joo, Tomas Simon, and Yaser Sheikh. Total Capture: A
3D deformation model for tracking faces, hands, and bodies.
In
The IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
(CVPR), 2018. 1, 3
[24] Angjoo Kanazawa, Michael J Black, David W Jacobs, and Jitendra
Malik. End-to-end recovery of human shape and pose. In The IEEE
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR),
2018. 1, 2, 3
[25] Diederik P Kingma and Max Welling.
Auto-encoding variational
bayes.
In International Conference on Learning Representations
(ICLR), 2014. 4
[26] Thomas N. Kipf and Max Welling. Semi-supervised classiﬁcation
with graph convolutional networks. In International Conference on
Learning Representations (ICLR), 2017. 3
[27] Nikos Kolotouros, Georgios Pavlakos, Michael J. Black, and Kostas
Daniilidis. Learning to reconstruct 3D human pose and shape via
model-ﬁtting in the loop. In The IEEE International Conference on
Computer Vision (ICCV), 2019. 1, 2, 3
[28] Nikos Kolotouros, Georgios Pavlakos, and Kostas Daniilidis. Convo-
lutional mesh regression for single-image human shape reconstruc-
tion.
In The IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition (CVPR), 2019. 1, 2, 5, 3
[29] Zorah L¨ahner, Daniel Cremers, and Tony Tung. DeepWrinkles: Ac-
curate and realistic clothing modeling. In European Conference on
Computer Vision. Springer, 2018. 3
[30] Anders Boesen Lindbo Larsen, Søren Kaae Sønderby, Hugo
Larochelle, and Ole Winther. Autoencoding beyond pixels using a
learned similarity metric. In International Conference on Machine
Learning (ICML), 2016. 2, 4
[31] Christoph Lassner, Javier Romero, Martin Kiefel, Federica Bogo,
Michael J Black, and Peter V Gehler. Unite the people: Closing
the loop between 3D and 2D human representations. In The IEEE
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR),
2017. 1, 2, 5
[32] Qimai Li, Zhichao Han, and Xiao-Ming Wu.
Deeper insights
into graph convolutional networks for semi-supervised learning. In
Thirty-Second AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 2018. 5
[33] Or Litany, Alex Bronstein, Michael Bronstein, and Ameesh Maka-
dia. Deformable shape completion with graph convolutional autoen-
coders. In The IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition (CVPR), 2018. 2, 3
[34] Ziwei Liu, Ping Luo, Shi Qiu, Xiaogang Wang, and Xiaoou Tang.
Deepfashion: Powering robust clothes recognition and retrieval with
rich annotations. In The IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2016. 3, 4


[35] Matthew Loper, Naureen Mahmood, Javier Romero, Gerard Pons-
Moll, and Michael J Black. SMPL: A skinned multi-person linear
model. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG), 34(6):248, 2015. 1,
2, 3
[36] Ryota Natsume, Shunsuke Saito, Zeng Huang, Weikai Chen,
Chongyang Ma, Hao Li, and Shigeo Morishima.
SiCloPe:
Silhouette-based clothed people. In The IEEE Conference on Com-
puter Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), June 2019. 2, 3, 4
[37] Alexandros Neophytou and Adrian Hilton. A layered model of hu-
man body and garment deformation. In International Conference on
3D Vision (3DV), 2014. 3
[38] Mohamed Omran, Christoph Lassner, Gerard Pons-Moll, Peter
Gehler, and Bernt Schiele. Neural body ﬁtting: Unifying deep learn-
ing and model based human pose and shape estimation. In Interna-
tional Conference on 3D Vision (3DV), 2018. 1, 2
[39] Chaitanya Patel, Zhouyingcheng Liao, and Gerard Pons-Moll. The
Virtual Tailor: Predicting Clothing in 3D as a Function of Human
Pose, Shape and Garment Style. In The IEEE Conference on Com-
puter Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2020. 3
[40] Georgios Pavlakos, Vasileios Choutas, Nima Ghorbani, Timo
Bolkart, Ahmed A. A. Osman, Dimitrios Tzionas, and Michael J.
Black. Expressive body capture: 3D hands, face, and body from
a single image. In The IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2019. 1, 2, 3
[41] Georgios Pavlakos, Luyang Zhu, Xiaowei Zhou, and Kostas Dani-
ilidis. Learning to estimate 3D human pose and shape from a single
color image. In The IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pat-
tern Recognition (CVPR), 2018. 1
[42] Leonid Pishchulin, Eldar Insafutdinov, Siyu Tang, Bjoern Andres,
Mykhaylo Andriluka, Peter V Gehler, and Bernt Schiele. Deepcut:
Joint subset partition and labeling for multi person pose estimation.
In The IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recogni-
tion (CVPR), 2016. 2
[43] Gerard Pons-Moll, Sergi Pujades, Sonny Hu, and Michael J Black.
Clothcap: Seamless 4D clothing capture and retargeting.
ACM
Transactions on Graphics (TOG), 36(4):73, 2017. 2, 3, 4
[44] Albert Pumarola, Jordi Sanchez, Gary Choi, Alberto Sanfeliu, and
Francesc Moreno-Noguer.
3DPeople: Modeling the Geometry of
Dressed Humans. In The IEEE International Conference on Com-
puter Vision (ICCV), 2019. 6
[45] Anurag Ranjan, Timo Bolkart, Soubhik Sanyal, and Michael J Black.
Generating 3D faces using convolutional mesh autoencoders. In The
European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV), 2018. 2, 3, 5, 6
[46] Anurag Ranjan, David T Hoffmann, Dimitrios Tzionas, Siyu Tang,
Javier Romero, and Michael J. Black. Learning multi-human optical
ﬂow. International Journal of Computer Vision (IJCV), Jan. 2020. 1
[47] Anurag Ranjan, Javier Romero, and Michael J Black. Learning hu-
man optical ﬂow. In British Machine Vision Conference (BMVC),
2018. 1, 2
[48] Shunsuke Saito, Zeng Huang, Ryota Natsume, Shigeo Morishima,
Angjoo Kanazawa, and Hao Li. PIFu: Pixel-Aligned Implicit Func-
tion for High-Resolution Clothed Human Digitization. In The IEEE
International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), 2019. 2, 3, 4
[49] Igor Santesteban, Miguel A. Otaduy, and Dan Casas. Learning-Based
Animation of Clothing for Virtual Try-On. Computer Graphics Fo-
rum (Proc. Eurographics), 2019. 3
[50] David Smith, Matthew Loper, Xiaochen Hu, Paris Mavroidis, and
Javier Romero. FACSIMILE: Fast and Accurate Scans From an Im-
age in Less Than a Second. In The IEEE International Conference
on Computer Vision (ICCV), 2019. 2
[51] Carste Stoll, J¨urgen Gall, Edilson de Aguiar, Sebastian Thrun, and
Christian Theobalt. Video-based reconstruction of animatable human
characters. In ACM SIGGRAPH ASIA, 2010. 3
[52] Gul Varol, Duygu Ceylan, Bryan Russell, Jimei Yang, Ersin Yumer,
Ivan Laptev, and Cordelia Schmid. Bodynet: Volumetric inference of
3D human body shapes. In The European Conference on Computer
Vision (ECCV). Springer, 2018. 2, 3, 4
[53] Gul Varol, Javier Romero, Xavier Martin, Naureen Mahmood,
Michael J Black, Ivan Laptev, and Cordelia Schmid. Learning from
synthetic humans. In The IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2017. 1, 2, 3
[54] Nitika Verma, Edmond Boyer, and Jakob Verbeek. Feastnet: Feature-
steered graph convolutions for 3D shape analysis. In The IEEE Con-
ference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2018.
2, 3
[55] Daniel Vlasic, Ilya Baran, Wojciech Matusik, and Jovan Popovi´c.
Articulated mesh animation from multi-view silhouettes. In ACM
Transactions on Graphics (TOG), volume 27, page 97. ACM, 2008.
6
[56] Tuanfeng Y Wang, Duygu Ceylan, Jovan Popovi´c, and Niloy J Mitra.
Learning a shared shape space for multimodal garment design. In
ACM SIGGRAPH ASIA, 2018. 3
[57] Yuxin Wu and Kaiming He. Group normalization. In The European
Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV). Springer, 2018. 1
[58] Jinlong Yang, Jean-S´ebastien Franco, Franck H´etroy-Wheeler, and
Stefanie Wuhrer.
Estimation of human body shape in motion
with wide clothing. In European Conference on Computer Vision.
Springer, 2016. 6
[59] Jinlong Yang, Jean-S´ebastien Franco, Franck H´etroy-Wheeler, and
Stefanie Wuhrer. Analyzing clothing layer deformation statistics of
3D human motions. In The European Conference on Computer Vi-
sion (ECCV). Springer, 2018. 2, 3
[60] Chao Zhang, Sergi Pujades, Michael J. Black, and Gerard Pons-Moll.
Detailed, accurate, human shape estimation from clothed 3D scan
sequences. In The IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition (CVPR), 2017. 4, 6
[61] Zerong Zheng, Tao Yu, Yixuan Wei, Qionghai Dai, and Yebin Liu.
DeepHuman: 3D human reconstruction from a single image. In The
IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), 2019.
2, 3, 4
[62] Hao Zhu, Xinxin Zuo, Sen Wang, Xun Cao, and Ruigang Yang. De-
tailed human shape estimation from a single image by hierarchical
mesh deformation.
In The IEEE Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2019. 2, 4
[63] Jun-Yan Zhu, Taesung Park, Phillip Isola, and Alexei A Efros. Un-
paired Image-to-Image Translation using Cycle-Consistent Adver-
sarial Networks. In The IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2017. 5
