Title: Otavatar: One-shot talking face avatar with controllable tri-plane rendering

OTAvatar: One-shot Talking Face Avatar with Controllable Tri-plane Rendering
Zhiyuan Ma1,2*
Xiangyu Zhu3*
Guojun Qi4
Zhen Lei1,2,3†
Lei Zhang1
1The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
2Center for Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Robotics, HKISI CAS
3State Key Laboratory of Multimodal Artiﬁcial Intelligence Systems, CASIA
4OPPO Research
zm2354.ma@connect.polyu.hk, xiangyu.zhu@nlpr.ia.ac.cn
guojunq@gmail.com, zlei@nlpr.ia.ac.cn, cslzhang@comp.polyu.edu.hk
Abstract
Controllability, generalizability and efﬁciency are the
major objectives of constructing face avatars represented
by neural implicit ﬁeld. However, existing methods have
not managed to accommodate the three requirements si-
multaneously. They either focus on static portraits, restrict-
ing the representation ability to a speciﬁc subject, or suffer
from substantial computational cost, limiting their ﬂexibil-
ity. In this paper, we propose One-shot Talking face Avatar
(OTAvatar), which constructs face avatars by a general-
ized controllable tri-plane rendering solution so that each
personalized avatar can be constructed from only one por-
trait as the reference. Speciﬁcally, OTAvatar ﬁrst inverts a
portrait image to a motion-free identity code. Second, the
identity code and a motion code are utilized to modulate
an efﬁcient CNN to generate a tri-plane formulated volume,
which encodes the subject in the desired motion. Finally,
volume rendering is employed to generate an image in any
view. The core of our solution is a novel decoupling-by-
inverting strategy that disentangles identity and motion in
the latent code via optimization-based inversion. Beneﬁt-
ing from the efﬁcient tri-plane representation, we achieve
controllable rendering of generalized face avatar at 35 FPS
on A100.
Experiments show promising performance of
cross-identity reenactment on subjects out of the training
set and better 3D consistency.
The code is available at
https://github.com/theEricMa/OTAvatar.
1. Introduction
Neural rendering has achieved remarkable progress and
promising results in 3D reconstruction. Thanks to the dif-
ferentiability in neuron computation, the neural rendering
*Equal contribution.
†Corresponding author.
OTAvatar
Convs
ID
Motion
Single 
Reference
Figure 1. OTAvatar animation results. The source subjects in
HDTF [44] dataset are animated by OTAvatar using a single por-
trait as the reference. We use the pose and expression coefﬁcients
of 3DMM to represent motion and drive the avatar. Note that these
subjects are not included in the training data of OTAvatar.
methods bypass the expensive cost of high-ﬁdelity digi-
tal 3D modeling, thus attracting the attention of many re-
searchers from academia and industry. In this work, we aim
to generate a talking face avatar via neural rendering tech-
niques, which is controllable by driving signals like video
and audio segments. Such animation is expected to inherit
the identity from reference portraits, while the expression
and pose can keep in sync with the driving signals.
The early works about talking face focus on expression
animation consistent with driving signals in constrained
frontal face images [5, 7, 27]. It is then extended to in-the-
wild scenes with pose variations [18, 35, 47, 48]. Many
arXiv:2303.14662v1  [cs.CV]  26 Mar 2023


previous works are 2D methods, where the image warping
adopted to stimulate the motion in 3D space is learned in
2D space [29, 31, 32, 36, 41]. These methods tend to col-
lapse under large pose variation. In contrast, there are 3D
methods that can address the pose problem, since the head
pose can be treated as a novel view. Both explicit [11, 20]
and implicit 3D representations [23] are introduced to face
rendering [15, 17, 21, 22, 25, 28, 46]. However, these meth-
ods either overﬁt to a single identity or fail to produce high-
quality animation for different identities.
In this work, we propose a one-shot talking face avatar
(OTAvatar), which can generate mimic expressions with
good 3D consistency and be generalized to different iden-
tities with only one portrait reference. Some avatar anima-
tion examples are shown in Fig. 1. Given a single reference
image, OTAvatar can drive the subject with motion signals
to generate corresponding face images. We realize it un-
der the framework of volume rendering. Current methods
usually render static subjects [22, 28]. Although there are
works [12, 15, 25, 26, 46] proposed to implement dynamic
rendering for face avatars, they need one model per subject.
Therefore, the generalization is poor. HeadNeRF [17] is a
similar work to us. However, its reconstruction results are
unnatural in the talking face case.
Our method is built on a 3D generative model pre-trained
on a large-scale face database to guarantee identity general-
ization ability. Besides, we employ a motion controller to
decouple the motion and identity in latent space when per-
forming the optimization-based GAN inversion, to make the
motion controllable and transferable to different identities.
The network architecture is compact to ensure inference ef-
ﬁciency. In the utilization of our OTAvatar, given a single
reference image, we ﬁx the motion code predicted by the
controller and only optimize the identity code so that a new
avatar of the reference image can be constructed. Such a
disentanglement enables the rendering of any desired mo-
tion by simply alternating the motion-related latent code to
be that of the speciﬁc motion representation.
The major contributions of this work can be summarized
as follows.
• We make the ﬁrst attempt for one-shot 3D face recon-
struction and motion-controllable rendering by taming
a pre-trained 3D generative model for motion control.
• We propose to decouple motion-related and motion-
free latent code in inversion optimization by prompt-
ing the motion fraction of latent code ahead of the op-
timization using a decoupling-by-inverting strategy.
• Our method can photo-realistically render any identity
with the desired expression and pose at 35FPS. The
experiment shows promising results of natural motion
and 3D consistency on both 2D and 3D datasets.
2. Related Works
2.1. Talking Face
Regarding the driving signal, the talking face methods
can be roughly divided into three categories: audio-driven,
image-driven and coefﬁcients-driven. Our approach is most
related to coefﬁcients-driven methods, which use either fa-
cial landmarks or 3DMM coefﬁcients to represent motion.
Facial landmarks involve identity and expression informa-
tion and is challenging to transfer motion across different
subjects. 3DMM coefﬁcients disentangle the identity, ex-
pression and pose, and thus they are good driven signals to
drive different faces.
Thies et al. [34] used 3D rendering to maintain the shape
and illumination attributes when transferring expression and
reﬁning mouth details with a mouth retrieval algorithm.
Geng et al. [14] used 3DMM to render a given subject with
different expressions, followed by a neural network to reﬁne
the detail and harmonize with the background. These meth-
ods cannot change the face pose. Ren et al. [29] mapped
3DMM expression and pose to a high-dimensional motion
representation, then predicted the dense image ﬂow to reen-
act faces via image warping. Doukas et al. [10] used addi-
tional 3DMM mesh ﬁtting results to assist the dense image
ﬂow prediction. Yin et al. [41] integrated pre-trained Style-
GAN [6] to generate high-resolution talking face prediction
by warping low-resolution feature maps. These warping-
based methods follow the two-stage workﬂow by ﬁrst warp-
ing images and then reﬁning facial detail, demonstrating
superior performance for same identity reenactment. But
in cross-identity reenactment, especially when there is a
large pose variation against the source portrait, the anima-
tion tends to collapse, since image warping is merely trained
to stimulate 3D motion in the 2D space. Our work animates
face avatars using 3D rendering and explicitly ensures 3D
consistency to handle large pose variations.
2.2. Volume Rendering
Volume rendering is a 3D rendering strategy and has
demonstrated its success in novel view synthesis. Existing
methods either use volume [11, 21] to explicitly represent
3D space or implicitly store the 3D scene in the MLP net-
work [23]. These methods are introduced to animate 3D-
consistent portraits. Yu et al. [42] and Raj et al. [28] re-
trieved the spatial information from sparse support views
to render portraits. On the other side, The 3D face gen-
erative model can reconstruct a given identity using GAN
Inversion.
These models vary from pure MLP architec-
ture [4], to low-resolution neural rendering followed by an
up-sampling strategy [24, 30], and to using more efﬁcient
3D presentation [3]. All these methods only support ren-
dering static portraits. To animate the avatar with control-
lable motion, AD-NeRF [15] and NeRFace [13] introduce


Motion Controller
(Trained From-scratch)
Pose + Expression
3DMM 
Coefficients
Tracking
3D Animator
EG3D Latent Space
Decoupling by Inverting
identity
code
motion
re-rendering
shared-motion
EG3D
(Pre-trained)
Mod
Mod
 
Alice
Bob
motion A
motion B
motion B
motion A
Figure 2.
Overview of OTAvatar.
OTAvatar contains a 3D face animator network and a latent code decoupling strategy, namely
decoupling-by-inverting. The 3D face animator is composed of a pre-trained 3D face generator [3] and a motion controller module.
The decoupling-by-inverting algorithm is an optimization-based image inversion that can decouple the latent code w into identity code
wid and motion code wx. When the model is well-trained, the motion-free identity code can be inferred from a single reference image,
and an avatar of an unseen subject can be constructed. The identity code can be integrated with any other motion code predicted by the
controller to animate the identity with desired motion.
either the audio feature or 3DMM expression coefﬁcients
to the NeRF model to render dynamic heads. Nerﬁes [25]
employs a deformation ﬁeld conditioned on spatial points
to represent the face motion of different frames. Hyper-
NeRF [26] adds an ambient slicing network to tackle the
topological drawback of Nerﬁes. Though these methods
have achieved motion control and view consistency for face
avatars, they all overﬁt each NeRF model to one subject,
thus lack generalizability.
HeadNeRF [17] is trained on
both multi-view and frontal face datasets and can be gen-
eralized to multiple identities and support motion control
using 3DMM coefﬁcients, but its rendering quality is not
satisfactory compared with the given portrait, and the mo-
tion control is unnatural with random jitters. In contrast,
our method can reconstruct photo-realistic face avatars in
one shot and animate natural talking motion.
2.3. Generative Prior
Many methods rely on pre-trained generative models.
Employing a generative model as the prior has the following
advantages. First, it provides rich and diverse facial priors,
such as texture, color, shape and pose, which can help to re-
store realistic and faithful facial details. For instance, Yang
et al. [40] leveraged a pre-trained GAN model as a prior de-
coder for blind face restoration. Second, it also enables one-
shot image manipulation both inside and outside of the do-
main. Well-designed schemes for disentanglement are nec-
essary to provide acceptable performance on ﬁne-grained
out-of-domain image manipulation. Zhang et al. [45] sug-
gested separating the attributes into global style—like tex-
ture and color—and structure—like shape and pose, and
performing domain-adaptive generation by transferring the
decoupled style attributes. The image manipulation also in-
cludes synthesizing human talking videos, Ivan et al. [33]
modeled the temporal dynamics of video frames through the
latent code disentanglement. Unlike other talking head gen-
eration methods [31,41], it only synthesizes center-aligned
faces. The recently presented 3D GANs have been pop-
ularized for their ability to generate 3D-consistent photo-
realistic human faces with explicit pose control. Katja et.al
[30] introduced 3D scene volume rendering without resort-
ing to computationally demanding voxel-based representa-
tion, and the model is trained from unposed 2D photos in
an adversarial manner. Chan et al. [3] proposed to gener-
ate high-quality geometry and multi-view consistent images
from 2D photos through a hybrid explicit-implicit network
architecture based on StyleGAN2 [19]. Despite the fact that
3D GANs’ explicit pose control and 3D-consistent genera-
tion are appealing for talking face synthesis, no previous
work has studied their application to talking face avatars.


3. Method
Talking face avatar aims to synthesize face images with
controllable expression and pose. In this paper, we inves-
tigate the possibility of endowing volume rendering with
the ability to 1) build a faithful identity representation in
one shot, 2) enable natural motion control, and 3) achieve
real-time inference speed. Our framework takes an identity
code and a motion signal as input and generates a tri-plane-
based [3] volume through a CNN architecture. By perform-
ing volume rendering on the tri-plane representation, where
each point is projected on the three feature planes and the
sampled features are fused to occupancy and color, a face
image at a given camera view can be generated as:
I(p) = R(G(wid, x; Θ), p),
(1)
where wid is the identity code, x is the motion signal,
G(·, ·; Θ) is a face volume generation network with Θ as its
network weights to reconstruct an encoded portrait in three
orthogonal feature planes, R(V, p) is the volume render-
ing with V as the volume and p as the camera view, and
I(p) ∈R3×H×W is the rendered result. In our implemen-
tation, the identity code wid can be extracted by optimizing
on a single reference image using our proposed decoupling-
by-inverting strategy (Sec. 3.3), achieving one-shot avatar
reconstruction. The motion signal x is 3DMM coefﬁcients
for ﬂexible control. We call G(·, ·; Θ) as 3D Animator be-
cause of its ability to animate an avatar with desired mo-
tion. Compared with 2D methods, we construct a neural 3D
space to promise multi-view consistency. Compared with
NeRF, we build a 3D space in the propagation of a CNN,
and directly sample features on the tri-plane representation,
saving the MLP computation on each sampled point.
3.1. 3D Animator Network Structure
Tri-plane volume representation. The output of the 3D
animator network G(·, ·; Θ) in Eqn. 1 is a tri-plane volume
representation, which is composed of three feature planes:
Vtri = (Fxy, Fxz, Fyz) = G(wid, x; Θ),
(2)
where Fxy, Fxz, and Fyz are three axis-aligned orthogo-
nal feature maps in the 3D space, implicitly forming the
volume Vtri.
When performing volume rendering, for
each queried point (x, y, z), we project it onto each of
three feature maps and retrieve the corresponding features
(Fxy(x, y), Fxz(x, z), Fyz(y, z)). The summation of fea-
tures is sent to a lightweight MLP to decode color and opac-
ity. Compared to fully implicit MLP architectures [4,15,46]
or volume representation [21], we can efﬁciently regress
the three 2D feature maps through a CNN architecture. In
our implementation, G is a deconvolutional network [6] that
outputs three 256 × 256 × 32 feature maps.
Animator structure. Towards animating the face avatar
of a given portrait, an intuitive solution is representing wid
with a pre-deﬁned feature and training G(·) from scratch.
However, we ﬁnd that the model does not work well due to
the sub-optimal wid. For example, when employing 3DMM
shape coefﬁcients [9] and face recognition features [8], the
identity information is not preserved in the rendering re-
sults because wid does not encode face appearances well.
These models are trained on cropped facial images which
contain no torso and hairstyle. Therefore, wid losses such
information that is necessary when animating portraits. The
network even collapses if we make wid learnable.
In this work, we employ a two-phase strategy to achieve
one-shot avatar reconstruction: 1) building a 3D face gen-
erator, and 2) making the generator controllable. We build
our 3D face generator on a pre-trained EG3D [3] network,
which incorporates tri-plane representation for efﬁcient 3D
face generation:
Vtri = Geg(w; Θeg),
(3)
where w is an uninterpretable latent code drawn from the
latent space of the generator Geg. The latent space is de-
termined by the generator weight Θeg. To control the latent
code w by the given identity represented by wid and motion
signal x, we propose a motion controller module C param-
eterized by Θc, which maps motion signal x to the motion
code wx, such that:
w = wid + wx = wid + C(x; Θc).
(4)
Injecting Eqn. 4 to Eqn. 3 , we have the structure of the 3D
animator:
G(wid, x; Θ) = Geg(wid + C(x; Θc); Θeg),
Θ = Θeg ∪Θc.
(5)
In our implementation, the motion signal x is constructed
by 3DMM pose and expression coefﬁcients [9], which
are more ﬂexible compared with image-based driving sig-
nals [31,32,36], especially in cross-identity driving.
Controller structure.
We use the concatenation of
3DMM pose and expression coefﬁcients to represent mo-
tion x. Practically, we use the adjacent coefﬁcients of pose
and expression within a particular radius to represent the
motion signal of the current frame, ﬁrstly the weighted sum-
mation of the coefﬁcients across the temporal dimension is
conducted to avoid noises, which is achieved by three 1D
convolution layers [29, 41]; secondly, a ﬁve-layer MLP is
employed to transform the weighted summation into a mo-
tion feature; ﬁnally, a codebook with learnable orthogonal
bases [36] is built, on which each motion feature is pro-
jected to get the ﬁnal motion code wx. The aforementioned
operation is summarized as follows:
wx = C(x; Θc) = D ∗FM(FT (x; ΘT ); ΘM),
(6)


where FT parameterized by ΘT is the temporal smooth-
ing network of 1D convolution layers, FM parameterized
by ΘM is the ﬁve-layer MLP which projects motion to the
magnitudes of bases contained in the codebook D. It can
be seen that the magnitude projection parameters, temporal
smoothing weights, and the codebook are the parameters of
the controller C to be trained, that is:
Θc = D ∪ΘT ∪ΘM.
(7)
3.2. Controller Training
Given a couple of source frame Is and driving frame Id,
along with their motion signals xs, xd and camera views
ps, pd, we perform the dual-objective optimization:
w∗
id = arg min
wid
(Ls + Ld),
Ls = L(Is, ˆIs) = L(Is, R(G(wid, xs; Θ), ps),
Ld = L(Id, ˆId) = L(Id, R(G(wid, xd; Θ), pd).
(8)
It is implemented to estimate the identity code wid shared
between Is and Id. G, R, and L indicate 3D face generator,
volume rendering, and loss function, respectively. The 3D
face animator G is parameterized by Θ = Θeg ∪Θc. Θeg
includes the parameters of the pre-trained 3D face genera-
tor, and Θc includes the parameters of the controller which
is the focus of our training scheme.
Training scheme. The purpose of controller training is
to decouple the identity code and motion code from the la-
tent code of the generator, making identity and motion re-
placeable in our generalized avatars. To this end, we pro-
pose the decoupling-by-inverting training strategy, which is
generally an alternation of identity optimization and con-
troller training at different steps.
Speciﬁcally, we ﬁrst
freeze Θc and perform Nid steps of back-propagation on
wid. Then we freeze wid and perform Nmo steps of back-
propagation on Θc so that the controller learns to add the
motion code on top of the identity code. In our implemen-
tation, Nid = 90 and Nmo = 10. After N = Nid + Nmo
steps, we slightly ﬁnetune Θeg with a learning rate of 10−4
to make the rendering ﬁt the driving signal better. A brief
pseudo-code of the whole scheme is provided in Alg. 1.
3.3. One-shot Avatar Construction
In the inference stage, given a single portrait image Ir, its
3DMM coefﬁcients xr, and camera view pr as the reference
of avatar construction, we can estimate the identity code wr
of the reference portrait via:
wr = arg min
wid
L(Ir, R(G(wid, xr), pr).
(9)
Afterwards, we can animate the identity with given driving
motion xd and camera view pd, either from the same or
different subject, through the following operation:
I(wr, xd, pd) = R(G(wr, xd), pd),
(10)
where I(wr, cd, pd) has the identity estimated as Ir, and
is animated with the motion cd and camera view pd. We
name Eqn. 9 as the decoupling-by-inverting inference strat-
egy since it can estimate decoupled identity code from la-
tent code in the iterative optimization-based GAN Inver-
sion, and can be used to render different motions.
3.4. Loss Terms
The loss L(I,ˆI) in Eqn. 8 and Eqn. 9 measures the error
between the animated result ˆI and the ground truth I. First,
a pre-trained VGG-19 network is implemented to calculate
the distance of multi-scale activation maps φi(I) via:
Lc =
X
i
φi(I) −φi(ˆI)

1 ,
(11)
where φi is the i-th layer of VGG. Second, the distance be-
tween the Gram matrices Gφ
j constructed from the j-th ac-
tivation maps φj [29] of I and ˆI is measured:
Ls =
X
j
Gφ
j (I) −Gφ
j (ˆI)

1 .
(12)
Third, we utilize the L1 distance performed on the eyes and
mouth regions to supervise the expression detail:
Lm =
X
n
Rn(I) −Rn(ˆI)

1 ,
(13)
where Rn is either the eyes or mouth region extracted us-
ing RoI-align on the bounding boxes calculated using land-
marks. Finally, the ID Loss is performed to preserve the
identity consistency:
Lid = 1 −cos(E(I), E(ˆI)),
(14)
where E is the Arcface face recognition model [8].
The animation loss L(I,ˆI) is a weighted summation of
the above loss terms and is implemented in both training and
test-time one-shot avatar construction. Additionally, in the
training, we maintain the stability of tri-plane representation
with monotonic and TV loss [3], and L1 loss on Θc to avoid
the latent code being out of the latent distribution of Geg.
4. Experiments
4.1. Experiment Setting
In this section, we ﬁrst describe the implementation de-
tail of our proposed method, the dataset used, and the base-
lines of our work. Then we compare our proposed method
with previous 2D and 3D methods on motion controllability
and multi-view consistency.


Implementation details. We use the off-the-shelf 3D
face reconstruction model to extract the expression and pose
coefﬁcients of 3DMM [9]. The motion of any timestamp is
represented by the window of adjacent 27 frames of expres-
sion and pose coefﬁcients. In practice, we ﬁnd that the ex-
tracted head poses contain too much noises to serve as the
camera pose. Therefore, we extract the camera pose using
the method in [15]. Our model is implemented in Pytorch
using four A100 GPUs. The total batch size is 24, with six
images per GPU. We use Adam optimizer with a 0.0001
learning rate to train the motion controller C and ﬁnetune
the generator G. Exponential Moving Average (EMA) is
employed to update Θc in Alg. 1 since it can stabilize the
training. The model is trained for 2000 iterations, and each
iteration contains N = Nid +Nmo = 100 steps to optimize
the identity codes and train the motion controller. For each
mini-batch of data, a new batch of latent codes are initial-
ized and optimized using the Adam optimizer with a 0.01
learning rate. Both the 64×64 resolution volume render-
ing results and 512×512 super-resolution results are imple-
mented to calculate the loss. During training, the identity
code wid is optimized in W space. After being extended
to the W+ space by channel-wisely repeated 14 times, it is
combined with the motion code wx and then fed into the
face generator G. It takes less than two days to train the
network entirely. During inference, we ﬁrst optimize the
identity code in W space, then use another N = 100 steps
to ﬁnetune it in W+ space [1,2].
Dataset.
Our model is trained on the HDTF [44]
dataset, which contains frontal talking faces from 362
videos and over 300 subjects. Following [41], we use the
pre-processing step in [31] and resize images to 512×512
resolution. The test dataset contains 20 videos of subjects
out of the training set. To evaluate the novel subject gener-
alizability and controllability in the 3D-consistent fashion,
we sample subjects from the Multiface [38] dataset, which
is particularly proposed for 3D-consistent face avatars.
Baseline methods. We mainly compare our method with
previous works that incorporate 3DMM coefﬁcients to reen-
act face avatars in either 2D/3D fashion and are generaliz-
able to unseen identities. For 2D methods, PIRenderer [29]
and StyleHEAT [41] achieve SOTA performance on face
reenactment. For 3D methods, HeadNeRF [17] is the most
advanced volume rendering method that incorporates con-
trollability and generalizability. Beyond coefﬁcients-based
methods, the SOTA image-driven method FOMM [31] is
also taken into comparison.
Evaluation
metrics.
We
adopt
peak-signal-to-
noise ratio (PSNR), structural similarity index measure
(SSIM) [37], and learned perceptual image patch similarity
(LPIPS) [43] to evaluate the visual quality. To measure the
realism of the synthesized results and the identity preser-
vation, we use frechet inception distance (FID) [16] and
Figure 3. Qualitative result for cross-identity reenactment. Ex-
amples are sampled from the HDTF dataset [44]. Both source and
driving subjects are not included in the training set.
cosine similarity of identity embedding (CSIM) [8] based
on ArcFace model, respectively. Besides, the average ex-
pression distance (AED), average pose distance (APD), and
average keypoint distance (AKD) are employed to evaluate
the facial expression and pose.
4.2. Evaluation Result
We evaluate OTAvatar on animating photo-realistic talk-
ing head videos and compare them with state-of-the-art
models that support identity-generalized animation meth-
ods. In the HDTF [44] dataset, we examine the identity-
motion disentanglement by transferring the motion of one
subject to drive the other subjects, namely cross-identity
reenactment.
The employed motion is extracted from a
video with large motion variation to evaluate the result in
extreme conditions. In the Multiface [38] dataset, we eval-
uate the consistency of the animation in different views,
namely multi-view reenactment. Note that none of the data
in this dataset has been used in training our method and
baselines.
For each talking corpus, we choose the ﬁrst
frame of the frontal-view camera recording as the reference
and enforce the network to animate the following frames in
frontal view and other views.
Qualitative comparison. Fig. 3 shows the results of dif-
ferent methods on cross-identity generation. Compared to
FOMM [31], PIRenderer [29] and StyleHEAT [41], which
use warping ﬁelds for reenacting faces, our method can
handle extreme pose variation and maintain identity con-
sistency. Compared to the 3D method of HeadNeRF, our
model fully reconstructs the identity-speciﬁc detail and syn-


Figure 4. Qualitative result for multi-view reenactment. Examples are sampled from the multi-view dataset [38]. All methods use the
ﬁrst frame of the frontal-view portrait to extract the identity feature, and take the expressions of sequential frames and poses of different
camera views to generate the talking face. Note that this subject is not included in the training set of any methods.
Multi-View Reenactment
Cross-Identity Reenactment
PSNR ↑
SSIM ↑
CSIM ↑
AED ↓
APD ↓
AKD ↓
LIPIPS ↓
FID ↓
CSIM ↑
AED ↓
APD ↓
AKD ↓
FID ↓
FOMM
20.75
0.639
0.505
2.004
0.545
5.052
0.308
101.6
0.672
3.196
0.500
4.198
113.2
PIRenderer
20.04
0.586
0.493
2.203
0.680
6.566
0.299
100.6
0.632
3.018
0.498
4.977
103.7
StyleHEAT
20.03
0.632
0.387
2.179
0.472
5.522
0.284
123.8
0.614
2.860
0.471
3.592
239.1
HeadNeRF
17.60
0.546
0.239
2.086
0.776
4.166
0.367
212.3
0.282
2.873
0.567
3.465
233.0
Ours
21.19
0.657
0.574
1.874
0.428
3.731
0.288
137.3
0.694
2.850
0.405
4.307
101.8
Table 1. Quantitative comparisons on multi-View reenactment and cross-identity reenactment.
thesizes more natural expression. The multi-view consis-
tency results are shown in Fig. 4. First, the 2D warping
method suffers facial malformation, which becomes more
serious in larger poses. Second, though HeadNeRF renders
accurate head poses, the generated results have noticeable
deterioration compared to the ground truth. Finally, the face
avatar constructed by our method preserves identity details
and multi-view consistency.
Quantitative comparison. The quantitative comparison
among competing methods is shown in Table 1. We can see
that the proposed method achieves the best performance in
terms of most of the criteria.
Inference speed. Table 2 lists the inference speed com-
parison among state-of-the-art 3D face avatar methods. By
utilizing the pre-trained 3D face generator and the compact
motion controller (0.8M parameters), our method achieves
the highest inference speed, demonstrating its effectiveness.
4.3. Ablation Study
Decoupling-by-inverting. The controller is trained by
the decoupling-by-inverting strategy described in Sec. 3.2,
where the training alternates between Nid steps of iden-
tity code optimization and Nmo steps of controller parame-
ters training. To validate the effectiveness of the alternative
manner, we discard it and jointly train the controller param-
eters and the identity code. The qualitative comparison is


Methods
Frames Per Second ↑
IMAvatar [46]
0.03
ADNeRF [15]
0.13
HeadNeRF [17]
25
Ours
35
Table 2. Quantitative comparison on the inference speed. The
comparison is conducted on an A100 GPU.
GT
Ours
Joint
Figure 5. Qualitative comparison of decoupling-by-inverting
training and joint training. Joint training cannot preserve iden-
tity information in one-shot avatar construction.
in Fig. 5. We see that the jointly trained model cannot pre-
serve identity during the animation because the controller
manages to overﬁt the identity information in the training
set, and the identity information is not fully encoded in the
identity code. The performance degradation caused by joint
training is also shown in Table 4. We also analyze the set-
ting of identity optimization step Nid and controller training
step Nmo, and list the results in Table 3. We observe that
Nid = 90, Nmo = 10 achieves a balance of expression re-
construction (AED) and identity preserving (CSIM).
Losses. We also perform an ablation study on the loss
functions, including the landmark region losses Lm and ID
losses Lid, as shown in Table 4. We can see that the ab-
sence of landmark region losses Lm causes a deterioration
of expression reconstruction, measured by AED, while the
absence of ID loss causes a performance drop in both ex-
pression and identity consistency.
3D generator ﬁnetuning.
When the controller train-
ing and identity code optimization are ﬁnished, we further
slightly ﬁnetune the pre-trained EG3D [3] face generator
Nmo
Nid
AED ↓
CSIM ↑
1
99
3.285
0.7200
5
95
3.178
0.716
10
90
2.850
0.694
20
80
3.231
0.592
Table 3. Ablation study on the decoupling-by-inverting hyper-
parameters. Experiments are conducted under the different set-
tings of Nmo and Nid with N = Nmo + Nid = 100.
AED ↓
CSIM ↑
ours
2.850
0.694
joint
3.009
0.689
w/o Lm
3.101
0.687
w/o Lid
3.164
0.592
w/o ﬁnetune
3.145
0.687
Table 4. Ablation study on the joint training, loss terms, and
ﬁnetuning.
with a learning rate of 0.0001. In Table 4, we show the re-
sults without ﬁnetuning. One can see that slightly ﬁnetun-
ing the face generator in the ﬁnal stage improves identity
and expression reconstruction performance.
5. Conclusion
We proposed a novel framework of one-shot 3D-
consistent talking face avatar, namely OTAvatar, using vol-
ume rendering. It jointly addressed the three challenges of
face avatars, i.e., generalizability, controllability, and efﬁ-
ciency. For identity-generalized rendering, we implemented
a pre-trained 3D face generator to reconstruct faces faith-
fully, given a single portrait reference. For motion control,
we proposed a motion controller module, which predicts the
motion code conditioned on 3DMM coefﬁcients. For efﬁ-
ciency, beneﬁting from the compact architecture of both the
3D generator and controller, our model can animate avatars
at a high speed. Besides, we proposed a decoupling-by-
inverting approach, which is both a training scheme and a
test-time disentangle strategy that decouples the latent code
into identity and motion codes via GAN inversion, so that
one can animate the avatar with different motions using the
motion codes predicted by the controller. Comprehensive
experiments were conducted to prove the advantage of our
proposed framework.
Acknowledgement
This work is supported in part by the Chinese Na-
tional Natural Science Foundation Projects #62176256,
#62276254, and the InnoHK program.


References
[1] Rameen Abdal, Yipeng Qin, and Peter Wonka.
Im-
age2stylegan: How to embed images into the stylegan latent
space? In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Con-
ference on Computer Vision, pages 4432–4441, 2019.
[2] Rameen Abdal, Yipeng Qin, and Peter Wonka.
Im-
age2stylegan++: How to edit the embedded images?
In
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vi-
sion and pattern recognition, pages 8296–8305, 2020.
[3] Eric R. Chan, Connor Z. Lin, Matthew A. Chan, Koki
Nagano, Boxiao Pan, Shalini De Mello, Orazio Gallo,
Leonidas Guibas, Jonathan Tremblay, Sameh Khamis, Tero
Karras, and Gordon Wetzstein. Efﬁcient geometry-aware 3D
generative adversarial networks. In CVPR, 2022.
[4] Eric R Chan, Marco Monteiro, Petr Kellnhofer, Jiajun Wu,
and Gordon Wetzstein. pi-gan: Periodic implicit generative
adversarial networks for 3d-aware image synthesis. In Pro-
ceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision
and pattern recognition, pages 5799–5809, 2021.
[5] Lele Chen, Ross K Maddox, Zhiyao Duan, and Chenliang
Xu. Hierarchical cross-modal talking face generation with
dynamic pixel-wise loss. In Proceedings of the IEEE Con-
ference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages
7832–7841, 2019.
[6] Min Jin Chong, Hsin-Ying Lee, and David Forsyth. Style-
gan of all trades: Image manipulation with only pretrained
stylegan. arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.01619, 2021.
[7] Joon Son Chung and Andrew Zisserman. Lip reading in the
wild. In Asian conference on computer vision, pages 87–103.
Springer, 2016.
[8] Jiankang Deng, Jia Guo, Niannan Xue, and Stefanos
Zafeiriou. Arcface: Additive angular margin loss for deep
face recognition.
In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF con-
ference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pages
4690–4699, 2019.
[9] Yu Deng, Jiaolong Yang, Sicheng Xu, Dong Chen, Yunde
Jia, and Xin Tong.
Accurate 3d face reconstruction with
weakly-supervised learning: From single image to image
set. In IEEE Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Work-
shops, 2019.
[10] Michail Christos Doukas, Stefanos Zafeiriou, and Viktoriia
Sharmanska. Headgan: One-shot neural head synthesis and
editing. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Con-
ference on Computer Vision, pages 14398–14407, 2021.
[11] Randima Fernando et al. GPU gems: programming tech-
niques, tips, and tricks for real-time graphics, volume 590.
Addison-Wesley Reading, 2004.
[12] Guy Gafni, Justus Thies, Michael Zollh¨ofer, and Matthias
Nießner. Dynamic neural radiance ﬁelds for monocular 4d
facial avatar reconstruction. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
(CVPR), pages 8649–8658, June 2021.
[13] Guy Gafni, Justus Thies, Michael Zollhofer, and Matthias
Nießner. Dynamic neural radiance ﬁelds for monocular 4d
facial avatar reconstruction. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
pages 8649–8658, 2021.
[14] Zhenglin Geng, Chen Cao, and Sergey Tulyakov.
3d
guided ﬁne-grained face manipulation.
In Proceedings of
the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, pages 9821–9830, 2019.
[15] Yudong Guo, Keyu Chen, Sen Liang, Yong-Jin Liu, Hujun
Bao, and Juyong Zhang. Ad-nerf: Audio driven neural ra-
diance ﬁelds for talking head synthesis. In Proceedings of
the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vi-
sion, pages 5784–5794, 2021.
[16] Martin Heusel, Hubert Ramsauer, Thomas Unterthiner,
Bernhard Nessler, and Sepp Hochreiter. Gans trained by a
two time-scale update rule converge to a local nash equilib-
rium. Advances in neural information processing systems,
30, 2017.
[17] Yang Hong, Bo Peng, Haiyao Xiao, Ligang Liu, and Juy-
ong Zhang.
Headnerf: A real-time nerf-based parametric
head model. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 20374–
20384, 2022.
[18] Xinya Ji,
Hang Zhou,
Kaisiyuan Wang,
Wayne Wu,
Chen Change Loy, Xun Cao, and Feng Xu. Audio-driven
emotional video portraits. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
conference on computer vision and pattern recognition,
pages 14080–14089, 2021.
[19] Tero Karras, Samuli Laine, Miika Aittala, Janne Hellsten,
Jaakko Lehtinen, and Timo Aila.
Analyzing and improv-
ing the image quality of stylegan.
In Proceedings of
the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern
recognition, pages 8110–8119, 2020.
[20] Marc Levoy. Display of surfaces from volume data. IEEE
Computer graphics and Applications, 8(3):29–37, 1988.
[21] Stephen Lombardi, Tomas Simon, Jason Saragih, Gabriel
Schwartz, Andreas Lehrmann, and Yaser Sheikh. Neural vol-
umes: Learning dynamic renderable volumes from images.
ACM Trans. Graph., 38(4):65:1–65:14, July 2019.
[22] Marko Mihajlovic, Aayush Bansal, Michael Zollhoefer, Siyu
Tang, and Shunsuke Saito.
KeypointNeRF: Generalizing
image-based volumetric avatars using relative spatial encod-
ing of keypoints. In European conference on computer vi-
sion, 2022.
[23] Ben Mildenhall, Pratul P Srinivasan, Matthew Tancik,
Jonathan T Barron, Ravi Ramamoorthi, and Ren Ng. Nerf:
Representing scenes as neural radiance ﬁelds for view syn-
thesis. Communications of the ACM, 65(1):99–106, 2021.
[24] Michael Niemeyer and Andreas Geiger. Giraffe: Represent-
ing scenes as compositional generative neural feature ﬁelds.
In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 11453–11464, 2021.
[25] Keunhong Park, Utkarsh Sinha, Jonathan T Barron, Soﬁen
Bouaziz, Dan B Goldman, Steven M Seitz, and Ricardo
Martin-Brualla. Nerﬁes: Deformable neural radiance ﬁelds.
In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference
on Computer Vision, pages 5865–5874, 2021.
[26] Keunhong Park, Utkarsh Sinha, Peter Hedman, Jonathan T.
Barron, Soﬁen Bouaziz, Dan B Goldman, Ricardo Martin-
Brualla, and Steven M. Seitz.
Hypernerf:
A higher-
dimensional representation for topologically varying neural
radiance ﬁelds. ACM Trans. Graph., 40(6), dec 2021.


[27] KR Prajwal, Rudrabha Mukhopadhyay, Vinay P Nambood-
iri, and CV Jawahar. A lip sync expert is all you need for
speech to lip generation in the wild. In Proceedings of the
28th ACM International Conference on Multimedia, pages
484–492, 2020.
[28] Amit Raj, Michael Zollhoefer, Tomas Simon, Jason Saragih,
Shunsuke Saito, James Hays, and Stephen Lombardi.
Pva:
Pixel-aligned volumetric avatars.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2101.02697, 2021.
[29] Yurui Ren, Ge Li, Yuanqi Chen, Thomas H Li, and Shan
Liu. Pirenderer: Controllable portrait image generation via
semantic neural rendering. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
International Conference on Computer Vision, pages 13759–
13768, 2021.
[30] Katja Schwarz, Yiyi Liao, Michael Niemeyer, and Andreas
Geiger. Graf: Generative radiance ﬁelds for 3d-aware im-
age synthesis. Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, 33:20154–20166, 2020.
[31] Aliaksandr Siarohin, St´ephane Lathuili`ere, Sergey Tulyakov,
Elisa Ricci, and Nicu Sebe. First order motion model for im-
age animation. Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, 32, 2019.
[32] Aliaksandr Siarohin, Oliver J Woodford, Jian Ren, Menglei
Chai, and Sergey Tulyakov. Motion representations for ar-
ticulated animation. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Con-
ference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages
13653–13662, 2021.
[33] Ivan Skorokhodov, Sergey Tulyakov, and Mohamed Elho-
seiny. Stylegan-v: A continuous video generator with the
price, image quality and perks of stylegan2. In Proceedings
of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pat-
tern Recognition, pages 3626–3636, 2022.
[34] Justus Thies, Michael Zollhofer, Marc Stamminger, Chris-
tian Theobalt, and Matthias Nießner. Face2face: Real-time
face capture and reenactment of rgb videos.
In Proceed-
ings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern
recognition, pages 2387–2395, 2016.
[35] Ting-Chun Wang, Ming-Yu Liu, Jun-Yan Zhu, Guilin Liu,
Andrew Tao, Jan Kautz, and Bryan Catanzaro.
Video-to-
video synthesis.
In Advances in Neural Information Pro-
cessing Systems (NeurIPS), 2018.
[36] Yaohui Wang, Di Yang, Francois Bremond, and Antitza
Dantcheva.
Latent image animator:
Learning to ani-
mate images via latent space navigation.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2203.09043, 2022.
[37] Zhou Wang, Alan C Bovik, Hamid R Sheikh, and Eero P Si-
moncelli. Image quality assessment: from error visibility to
structural similarity. IEEE transactions on image processing,
13(4):600–612, 2004.
[38] Cheng-hsin Wuu, Ningyuan Zheng, Scott Ardisson, Rohan
Bali, Danielle Belko, Eric Brockmeyer, Lucas Evans, Timo-
thy Godisart, Hyowon Ha, Alexander Hypes, Taylor Koska,
Steven Krenn, Stephen Lombardi, Xiaomin Luo, Kevyn
McPhail, Laura Millerschoen, Michal Perdoch, Mark Pitts,
Alexander Richard, Jason Saragih, Junko Saragih, Takaaki
Shiratori, Tomas Simon, Matt Stewart, Autumn Trimble,
Xinshuo Weng, David Whitewolf, Chenglei Wu, Shoou-I Yu,
and Yaser Sheikh. Multiface: A dataset for neural face ren-
dering. In arXiv, 2022.
[39] Weihao Xia, Yulun Zhang, Yujiu Yang, Jing-Hao Xue, Bolei
Zhou, and Ming-Hsuan Yang.
Gan inversion: A survey.
IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intel-
ligence, 2022.
[40] Tao Yang, Peiran Ren, Xuansong Xie, and Lei Zhang. Gan
prior embedded network for blind face restoration in the
wild. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Com-
puter Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pages 672–
681, June 2021.
[41] Fei Yin, Yong Zhang, Xiaodong Cun, Mingdeng Cao, Yanbo
Fan, Xuan Wang, Qingyan Bai, Baoyuan Wu, Jue Wang,
and Yujiu Yang.
Styleheat: One-shot high-resolution ed-
itable talking face generation via pretrained stylegan. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2203.04036, 2022.
[42] Alex Yu, Vickie Ye, Matthew Tancik, and Angjoo Kanazawa.
pixelnerf: Neural radiance ﬁelds from one or few images.
In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 4578–4587, 2021.
[43] Richard Zhang, Phillip Isola, Alexei A Efros, Eli Shecht-
man, and Oliver Wang. The unreasonable effectiveness of
deep features as a perceptual metric. In Proceedings of the
IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recogni-
tion, pages 586–595, 2018.
[44] Zhimeng Zhang, Lincheng Li, Yu Ding, and Changjie
Fan.
Flow-guided one-shot talking face generation with
a high-resolution audio-visual dataset.
In Proceedings of
the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, pages 3661–3670, 2021.
[45] Zicheng Zhang, Yinglu Liu, Congying Han, Tiande Guo,
Ting Yao, and Tao Mei.
Generalized one-shot domain
adaption of generative adversarial networks. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2209.03665, 2022.
[46] Yufeng Zheng, Victoria Fern´andez Abrevaya, Marcel C.
B¨uhler, Xu Chen, Michael J. Black, and Otmar Hilliges. I
M Avatar: Implicit morphable head avatars from videos. In
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2022.
[47] Hang Zhou, Yu Liu, Ziwei Liu, Ping Luo, and Xiaogang
Wang. Talking face generation by adversarially disentangled
audio-visual representation. In AAAI Conference on Artiﬁ-
cial Intelligence (AAAI), 2019.
[48] Hang Zhou, Yasheng Sun, Wayne Wu, Chen Change Loy,
Xiaogang Wang, and Ziwei Liu. Pose-controllable talking
face generation by implicitly modularized audio-visual rep-
resentation. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Com-
puter Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2021.
