Title: AIpparel: A Multimodal Foundation Model for Digital Garments

AIpparel: A Multimodal Foundation Model for Digital Garments
Kiyohiro Nakayama1∗Jan Ackermann1,2∗† Timur Levent Kesdogan1,2∗†
Yang Zheng1 Maria Korosteleva2 Olga Sorkine-Hornung2
Leonidas J. Guibas1 Guandao Yang1 Gordon Wetzstein1
1Stanford University
2ETH Z¨urich
pparel
"A knee-length
jumpsuit with 
long sleeves."
Multimodal Input
Garment Editing - "asymmetric sleeve"
Text-to-Garment
Generation
Text-and-Image-
to-Garment Generation
Image-to-Garment Generation
Draping
Simulation
Sewing Pattern
AI
Figure 1. AIpparel. We present a multimodal foundation model for digital garments trained by fine-tuning a large multimodal model on
a custom sewing pattern dataset using a novel tokenization scheme for these patterns. AIpparel generates complex, diverse, high-quality
sewing patterns based on multimodal inputs, such as text and images, and it unlocks new applications such as language-instructed sewing
pattern editing. The generated sewing patterns can be directly used to simulate the corresponding 3D garments.
Abstract
Apparel is essential to human life, offering protection, mir-
roring cultural identities, and showcasing personal style.
Yet, the creation of garments remains a time-consuming
process, largely due to the manual work involved in design-
ing them. To simplify this process, we introduce AIpparel,
a multimodal foundation model for generating and editing
sewing patterns.
Our model fine-tunes state-of-the-art
large multimodal models (LMMs) on a custom-curated
large-scale dataset of over 120,000 unique garments,
each with multimodal annotations including text, images,
and sewing patterns.
Additionally, we propose a novel
tokenization scheme that concisely encodes these complex
sewing patterns so that LLMs can learn to predict them
efficiently. AIpparel achieves state-of-the-art performance
in single-modal tasks,
including text-to-garment and
image-to-garment prediction, and enables novel multi-
modal garment generation applications such as interactive
garment editing.
The project website is at https:
//georgenakayama.github.io/AIpparel/.
∗Equal Contribution.
†Work done as a visiting researcher at Stanford.
1. Introduction
Clothing plays a crucial role in society, providing protection
from the weather, reflecting societal norms, and serving as
a means of personal expression. A key stage in garment
production is the development of sewing patterns—a set of
flat 2D panels with standardized assembly instructions that
form a complete 3D garment [4]. Pattern making is a chal-
lenging task due to the complex geometric relationship be-
tween the 2D pattern and the draped 3D shape of the sewn
garment. Even an experienced tailor must go through multi-
ple iterations, incorporating feedback from various sources,
including verbal descriptions of the garment’s fit and feel, as
well as visual references of its appearance. To simplify the
pattern-making process, we explore strategies to leverage
emerging generative models with multimodal input, such as
text and images.
State-of-the-art sewing pattern prediction methods are
designed to work with one specific input modality, such
as 3D points [6, 14, 29], images [46, 50, 70, 75, 79], or
language [21]. While effective within their respective do-
mains, these single-modal approaches are often challeng-
ing to adapt to garment prediction tasks requiring differ-
ent or combined input modalities. Expanding these meth-
arXiv:2412.03937v5  [cs.CV]  5 Apr 2025


ods to multimodal pattern prediction presents two primary
challenges. First, no large-scale multimodal sewing pattern
dataset is publicly available. Second, the capacity to accu-
rately interpret multimodal inputs typically only emerges in
large models with billions of parameters [1, 36]. It remains
uncertain how to efficiently scale existing methods to mod-
els of this size.
In this paper, we propose to build such multimodal gar-
ment generative models by extending an existing large mul-
timodal model (LMM) [36, 62, 74] to understand sewing
patterns with complex geometries. To achieve this, we an-
notate the largest sewing pattern dataset [31] with multi-
modal labels. Our annotated dataset is ten times larger than
those used by previous state-of-the-art generative meth-
ods [21, 29, 38], including over 120,000 unique sewing pat-
terns paired with detailed text descriptions, images, edited
sewing patterns, and editing instructions. Fine-tuning an
LMM to perform multimodal garment generation requires
representing complex garments in a format that LMMs can
understand—tokens. For this task, we develop a novel tok-
enization method that is both expressive in representing the
complex geometries of sewing patterns and concise enough
to fit within the limited context length of existing LMMs,
making fine-tuning computationally efficient.
Combining these components, we present AIpparel, a
large multimodal model for generating sewing patterns.
AIpparel can predict sewing patterns with complex geome-
tries and outperforms state-of-the-art methods in single-
modal garment prediction, often by a large margin. More-
over, our approach unlocks entirely new multimodal gar-
ment generation tasks. Our contributions include:
• We present GCD-MM, a multimodal sewing pattern
dataset extending the largest public dataset of sewing
patterns with multimodal annotations. We plan to pub-
licly release the dataset to inspire innovative garment pre-
diction capabilities and further enable research in multi-
modal garment generation.
• We develop a novel tokenization scheme and a new train-
ing objective for fine-tuning LMMs to predict sewing pat-
terns. This tokenization method is critical for retargeting
LMMs to multimodal garment prediction tasks efficiently.
• We present AIpparel, the first multimodal foundation
model for sewing pattern prediction capable of taking lan-
guage, images, and sewing patterns as input.
2. Related Works
Garment Generation.
Prior works have studied learning-
based garment generation represented in various formats,
including images [5, 27], 3D meshes [17, 26, 33, 40,
41, 44, 49, 54, 57, 60, 81, 83, 85, 86], and sewing pat-
terns [21, 29, 38, 50, 68].
Our paper focuses on gen-
erating sewing patterns, which, compared to other repre-
sentations, are the industry standard and can be directly
used for downstream simulation and manufacturing. Ear-
lier works have explored a variety of different ways to gen-
erate and predict sewing patterns, including retrieval-based
methods [14, 20], predicting sewing pattern templates with
few parameters [25, 64, 65, 76], or cutting 3D scans into 2D
panels [16, 18, 37, 43, 55, 67]. These algorithms usually re-
quire heuristics, such as the output garment templates. This
limits their flexibility in extending to different input modal-
ities or more complex garment types. Further, researchers
have successfully applied deep learning methods to gener-
ate sewing patterns [21, 29, 38]. While these methods can
predict accurate sewing patterns based on input condition-
ing, they are task-specific models designed to work well
only in a single modality. Extending these single-modal
methods to a novel modality is difficult, in part because of
the lack of large-scale multimodal sewing-pattern datasets
and the requirement to redesign the network architecture.
While Wang et al. [68] can predict sewing patterns from
multiple modalities, including images, 3D garments, and
body measurements, their method is limited to predicting
simple garments with a predefined set of parameters. In this
paper, we aim to tackle the challenge of creating a large
multimodal generative model by curating the first multi-
modal garment dataset with complex garment geometries
and providing a scalable recipe building on existing large
multimodal models.
Extending Large Multimodal Models.
Large multi-
modal models have gained significant attention for their
ability to understand language and images [2, 15, 48,
58, 62].
Efforts to extend LMMs to additional domains
typically fall into two categories.
Optimization-free ap-
proaches [24, 39, 56, 69, 71, 74, 77] employ prompt en-
gineering.
The other option is to fine-tune LMMs to
take the new modality as input and/or output.
The lat-
ter approach was first introduced for vision-language mod-
els [36, 61, 84] and subsequent works extended it to other
modalities [11, 19, 32, 34, 72, 80]. Their approaches typi-
cally involve using pre-trained encoders [32, 34, 72] or stan-
dard discrete representations [11, 80] to convert the input
modalities into tokens and align them with the text feature
space of the LMMs. In particular, LLaVA [36] is pioneer-
ing in fine-tuning Large Language Models (LLMs) for vi-
sual understanding. It uses a pre-trained vision encoder to
encode images into tokens, and a trainable projection layer
to project the visual tokens into the LLM’s feature space.
We build our work on top of LLaVA by fine-tuning it to un-
derstand sewing patterns. This presents unique challenges,
however, due to the lack of pretrained encoders or learning-
efficient representations for sewing patterns. This motivates
us to design an efficient, learning-friendly tokenizer and a
fine-tuning objective for sewing pattern prediction.
Garment Datasets.
Garment datasets mostly fall into one
of the following three categories: 1) datasets based on 3D
scans of real-world garments [3, 9, 22, 41, 59, 73, 85],
2) datasets of designer-created garments [10, 87], and 3)


Dataset
Total
Text
Image
Edits
Wang et al. [68]
8k
✗
✓
✓
Korosteleva and Lee [28]
23.5k
✗
✓
✗
Sewfactory [38]
19.1k
✗
✓
✗
DressCode [21]
20.3k
✓
✗
✗
GCD [31]
130k
✗
✓
✗
GCD-MM (Ours)
120k
✓
✓
✓
Table 1. Modalities of Sewing Patter Datasets.
GCD-MM is
a large-scale sewing pattern dataset with multimodal annotations,
including text, images, and edited patterns.
datasets containing mostly procedurally generated sewing
patterns [7, 26, 28, 38, 45, 51, 63, 66, 68]. While 3D gar-
ment scans and designer-created garments can accurately
capture the real-world complexity of garments, they are ex-
pensive to obtain, which limits the scale of these categories
of data. Our work focuses on leveraging large-scale pro-
cedurally generated sewing pattern datasets. To the best of
our knowledge, the largest synthetic sewing pattern datasets
available are DressCode [21], SewFactory [38], and Gar-
mentCodeData (GCD) [30, 31]. None of their annotations,
however, contain the full combinations of text, images, and
sewing pattern edits, making them insufficient for training
a multimodal sewing pattern generative model. To over-
come this data gap, we curate the first large-scale multi-
modal sewing pattern dataset by expanding GCD with an-
notations including text, editing pairs, and editing instruc-
tions. Tab. 1 compares different sewing pattern datasets and
their annotation modalities.
3. Method
We propose a large multimodal generative model for sewing
patterns by fine-tuning existing LMMs on a multimodal
sewing pattern dataset.
For this purpose, we first cu-
rate a sewing pattern dataset with multimodal annotations
(Sec. 3.1). We then describe how to train our model, AIp-
parel, using an efficient tokenization scheme for sewing pat-
terns, with LlaVA 1.5-7B [36] as a base model (Sec. 3.2).
3.1. Multimodal GarmentCode Dataset
We create annotations covering many modalities to train
a multimodal sewing pattern generative model.
Specif-
ically, we build on top of the largest existing sewing-
pattern dataset, GarmentCodeData (GCD) [31], to incor-
porate two other modalities: text descriptions and sewing
pattern pairs with editing instructions. We dub our dataset
GarmentCodeData-MultiModal (GCD-MM).
Text description of sewing patterns.
To enable applica-
tions such as text-conditioned sewing pattern generation, it
is important to obtain detailed text annotation describing the
sewing patterns [8, 21]. He et al. [21] created short keyword
descriptions of sewing patterns by prompting GPT4V with
rendered images. However, this method suffers from hallu-
cination, and the short keywords are insufficient to describe
the garments in detail, leading to ambiguities. Our pipeline
improves on this by leveraging the design parameters as-
sociated with each synthetically generated sewing pattern
to create accurate descriptions that capture the garment’s
key features. Specifically, we develop a rule-based algo-
rithm to generate a set of short phrases, including a garment
type (e.g., “midi dress”, “godet skirt”) and brief descriptions
based on distinctive characteristics (e.g., “flared hem”, “V-
neckline”). To obtain the final sewing pattern description,
we prompt GPT-4o [74] using the rule-based short captions
and the rendered views of the draped garment.
Our ap-
proach reduces GPT-4o’s hallucination and results in more
accurate descriptions in natural language. Please refer to
the supplementary for caption comparison with DressCode
and the prompts and rules we used to generate them.
Language-instructed Sewing Pattern Editing.
We also
augment GCD with language-instructed editing annota-
tions.
Specifically, we use the programming abstraction
from GarmentCode [30] to create paired sewing patterns
with corresponding text instructions describing the applied
edits.
We first manually specify a series of sewing pat-
tern edits using the abstraction. This includes edits such as
adjustments in skirt and pants length, changing insert and
neckline styles, and adding or excluding a hood or sleeve.
For each modification, we generate captions using a text
template to describe the applied changes. See the supple-
mentary for editing templates and captions examples.
3.2. AIpparel
AIpparel fine-tunes LLaVA 1.5-7B on our GCD-MM
dataset to generate sewing patterns from multimodal input.
For this purpose, we need to encode sewing patterns into a
compact list of tokens for LLaVA’s input. We also propose a
novel fine-tuning objective that allows AIpparel to generate
both discrete tokens and continuous parameters. Figure 2
shows an overview of our method.
Pattern Representation.
Following GCD [31], we define
sewing patterns as a set of 2D panels in 3D with stitching in-
formation. A sewing pattern P = (P, S) is a tuple consist-
ing of N panels P = {P1, . . . , PN} and stitching informa-
tion S. Each panel Pi is a planar surface with vertices Vi =
{v(i)
1 , . . . , v(i)
ni } and edges Ei = (e(i)
1 , . . . , e(i)
ni ), where each
edge contains two endpoints connecting (v(i)
k , v(i)
k′ ) with
k′ = k mod ni + 1. Since each panel is defined in its
own coordinate frame, we always set v(i)
1
= 0 ∈R2. An
edge can be a straight line, a quadratic or cubic B´ezier
curve, or an arc, and includes its corresponding control
vertices c(i)
k . Each panel also includes a rigid 3D trans-
formation R that transforms Pi into the global coordinate
frame for draping. Lastly, each panel contains a unique
name indicating the panel type for the designers. We define
stitching information S as a set of edge pairs among panel


Figure 2. Illustration of Our Method. AIpparel uses a novel sewing pattern tokenizer (light blue region) to tokenize each panel into a set
of special tokens (light green region). Panel vertex positions and 3D transformations are incorporated using positional embeddings (colored
arrows) to the tokens. AIpparel takes in multimodal inputs, such as images and texts (light orange region), to output sewing patterns using
autoregressive sampling (light grey region). Finally, the output is decoded to produce simulation-ready sewing patterns (light pink region).
See Section 3 for method details.
edges, i.e., S = {(e(i1)
k1 , e(j1)
l1
), . . . , (e(im)
km , e(jm)
lm
)} where
each (e(is)
ks , e(js)
ls
) indicates that edge e(is)
ks
from panel Pis
will be stitched with edge e(js)
ls
. See the supplementary for
representation details.
Sewing Pattern Tokenization.
The sewing pattern rep-
resentation in GCD contains both continuous parameters,
such as panel vertex coordinates, and discrete parameters,
such as the number of panels and stitches.
This poses
challenges in representing each sewing pattern compactly
as a set of tokens for the transformer’s prediction. Prior
works rely on extensive zero-padding to ensure that all
sewing patterns can be represented as a fixed-length vec-
tor [21, 29, 38]. This approach is impractical for the com-
plex sewing patterns found in GCD-MM, as it produces an
excessively long context.
For example, the tokenization
scheme of He et al. [21] requires more than 30k tokens to
represent a typical sewing pattern in the GCD-MM dataset,
making it extremely inefficient for generation and learning.1
Inspired by recent work on vector graphics genera-
tion [13], we develop a tokenization scheme that efficiently
represents sewing patterns as a sequence of drawing com-
mands. Specifically, we introduce four special tokens to
indicate the start of a garment (<SoG>) and the end of a
garment (<EoG>), as well as the start of a panel (<SoP>)
and the end of a panel (<EoP>). With these tokens, each
sewing pattern can be represented as
Eg(P) = <SoG>Ep(P1, S) · · · Ep(Pn, S)<EoG>,
(1)
1See supplementary for a detailed analysis.
where
Ep
tokenizes
panel
P
in
the
form
of
<SoP> . . . <EoP>.
Ep consists of three pieces of
panel information:
name, transformation, and edges.
The panel name is tokenized using LLaVA-1.5-7B’s text
tokenizer and inserted after <SoP>. We introduce a new
token <R> and place it after the panel name to represent the
panel’s transformation. Each edge type also corresponds to
two special tokens, depending on whether the edge ends at
the starting endpoint: line (<L>, <cL>), quadratic B´ezier
curve (<Q>, <cQ>), cubic B´ezier curve (<B>, <cB>), and
arc (<A>, <cA>). We also introduce a set of stitching tag
tokens {<t1>, . . . , <tM>, <tN>} to represent stitching
information S. We associate each edge with a stitching tag
so that (e(is)
ks , e(js)
ls
) ∈S iff there exists a ∈{1, . . . , M}
such that e(is)
ks
and e(js)
ls
are both associated with <Ta>. If
an edge is not stitched to another edge, it is associated with
the null tag <tN>. For example, a panel consisting of two
lines stitched together, one cubic B´ezier curve and an arc is
tokenized as
<SoP>[panel name]<R><L><t1><L><t1>
<B><tN><cA><tN><EoP>.
Compared to the DressCode tokenizer [21], our proposed
scheme uses around 100 times fewer tokens to describe the
same garment. On average, we represent a sewing pattern
with around 250 tokens with a maximum of 838 tokens on
GCD-MM, whereas DressCode uses more than 30k tokens
for each sewing pattern on the same data.
Notation.
From now on, we use bold letters (e.g., X ∈
RN×D) to denote the input embedding sequence to the


Figure 3. Image-to-Garment Prediction (Qualitative). GCD-MM (Left): our model can reconstruct suitable sewing patterns from the
input image alone. In contrast, SewFormer does not produce simulation-ready sewing patterns despite fine-tuning. SewFactory (Right):
SewFormer produces inaccurate panels (top row) and incorrect garment types (bottom row) while AIpparel accurately recovers sewing
patterns from the images, resulting in superior simulation results. See Sec. 4.1.
Dataset
Method
Panel L2 (↓)
#Panel Acc (↑)
#Edge Acc (↑)
Rot L2 (↓)
Transl L2 (↓)
#Stitch Acc (↑)
Sewfactory
SewFormer
3.3
89.8
99.3
.008
0.8
99.2
AIpparel
2.8
93.9
99.9
.005
0.6
99.8
GCD-MM
SewFormer-FT
12.3
79.4
44.7
.040
4.5
2.8
AIpparel
5.4
85.2
82.7
.020
2.7
77.2
Table 2. Image-to-Garment Prediction (Quantitative). AIpparel achieves state-of-the-art performance in both datasets and surpasses
SewFormer-FT by a large margin on GCD-MM.
transformer. We denote the i-th embedding in X as Xi,
and X<i, X>i are sliced sequences before or after the i-the
embedding, respectively. We use fϕ to denote the language
transformer from LLaVA. We use X to denote tokens be-
fore passing through fϕ and H = fϕ(X) as the output
hidden features from the transformer.
Continuous Parameters.
The tokenization scheme in
Eq. 1 does not include any continuous parameters such as
vertex positions, control points for edges, or rigid transfor-
mation of panels. Prior works represent continuous param-
eters as quantized tokens in discrete space [21, 47]. This
introduces quantization error for the continuous parame-
ters and uses more tokens per panel, leading to a longer,
inefficient representation.
Inspired by recent approaches
of extending LMMs [19, 32], we propose using small re-
gression heads to map hidden features of the transformer
to the continuous parameters. Specifically, we define an
MLP g(e)
θ
: RD →RC to map LLaVA’s hidden features
from the last layer to vertices and control points. As illus-
trated in Fig. 2, g(e)
θ
takes the output embedding correspond-
ing to the token right before the edge type token. Con-
cretely, if the i-th token, Xi, corresponds to an edge-type
token for edge e, its associated output embedding H<i =
fϕ(X<i) ∈R(i−1)×D is used to predict e’s endpoint and
control parameters via g(e)
θ (Hi−1). Similarly, we also de-
fine a transformation regression head g(R)
θ′
: RD →R7
mapping the hidden features of <R>’s previous token to a
translation T ∈R3 and a rotation quaternion q ∈H. In this
way, continuous parameters are regressed using small re-
gression heads that are jointly trained with the transformer,
leading to more efficient context length usage in represent-
ing sewing patterns. At training time, we use ground-truth
parameters for supervision, and during generation, we use
the last hidden feature from the output for regression should
an edge-type token or a transformation token be sampled.
Positional Embeddings.
To include information on con-
tinuous parameters in the sewing pattern tokenization de-
fined in Eq. 1, we include the second endpoint of each edge
as a positional embedding added to the token embedding.
Specifically, we define h(e)
φ
: R2 →RD as a two-layer per-
ceptron. For each edge e = (v1, v2) with an edge-type to-
ken embedding of Xi, we add h(e)
φ (v2) to Xi to inform the
language model fϕ of the vertex positions. We also define


h(R)
φ′
: R7 →RD to be the projection function for trans-
formations. The transformation parameters (t, q) ∈R7 for
each panel are projected using h(R)
φ
and added to the token
embedding for <R>. At training time, we use ground-truth
vertex and 3D transformations as positional embeddings,
and during generation, we use the parameters predicted by
the regression heads.
Training.
We keep both the vision encoder and projection
frozen, and fine-tune all weights in the language model fϕ,
regression heads g(e)
θ , g(R)
θ′ , and the positional embedding
projection layers h(e)
φ , h(R)
φ′ . The fine-tuning loss is defined
as a combination of cross-entropy (CE) on the discrete to-
kens and L2 loss on the continuous parameters:
L = CE(fϕ(X<−1), X1>)
+ λ
X
e′
g(e)
θ
◦fϕ
 X<ie′

−ve′
2

2
+ λ
X
R′
g(R)
θ′
◦fϕ
 X<iR′

−R′
2 .
(2)
Here, P
e′ is the sum over all edges in the sewing pattern’s
sequence X. For each edge e′, its second endpoint is de-
noted as ve′
2 . Similarly, P
R′ is the sum over all the transfor-
mations. We do not explicitly include the positional embed-
ding in Eq. 2, but it is added according to the rules defined
in the previous paragraph.
4. Experiments
We validate the effectiveness of our model on multiple tasks
and conduct an ablation study on the key technical designs.
Training Details.
We train AIpparel on GCD-MM mul-
timodal data samples for image-to-garment and text-to-
garment generation, as well as text-based garment editing.
We randomly split GCD-MM into train-validation-test sub-
sets with a 90:5:5 ratio. All of our results on GCD-MM
below are predicted using a single model. See the supple-
mentary for a complete implementation and training setup.
Metrics.
To quantitatively measure our sewing pattern
predictions, we use reconstruction metrics established by
previous works [29, 38].
Given a pair of generated and
ground-truth sewing patterns, we measure 1) Panel L2, Rot
L2, and Transl L2: average vertex, rotation and translation
L2 distance between predicted and ground-truth panels; 2)
#Panel Accuracy: percentage of sewing patterns with cor-
rectly predicted number of panels; 3) #Edge Accuracy: per-
centage of correctly predicted edges in each correctly pre-
dicted panel; 4) #Stitch Accuracy: accuracy of predicted
stitches compared to ground truth. To save space in compact
tables, we report Accuracy, the product of #Panel Accuracy
and #Edge Accuracy, to provide a comprehensive measure-
ment of garment reconstruction quality. All L2-based met-
rics are measured in centimeters except for rotation.
4.1. Image to Sewing Pattern Prediction
We test our model’s capability to reconstruct garments from
a single image using two datasets: SewFactory [38] and
GCD-MM. For the baseline, we compare with SewFormer’s
pre-trained model on the SewFactory dataset. Because Sew-
Former did not release their train–test split for their pre-
trained model, we use a custom split for a fair comparison.
For GCD-MM, we fine-tune SewFormer until its validation
loss no longer improves. We denote it as SewFormer-FT.
Tab. 2 shows quantitative comparisons on the two
datasets.
AIpparel outperforms the baselines on both
datasets, suggesting that our method outputs more accurate
sewing patterns than the baseline. In particular, AIpparel
shows a large performance improvement over SewFormer-
FT on the difficult GCD-MM dataset, indicating the effec-
tiveness of our method in predicting more complex sewing
patterns. Fig. 3 shows qualitative results. The two exam-
ples on the left show that SewFormer-FT fails to recon-
struct simulatable garments despite fine-tuning. This sug-
gests that SewFormer cannot adapt to complex garments
with small panels and diverse edge types. In contrast, our
model predicts sewing patterns matching the input images,
including small panels such as the waistband on the top row
and the sleeve cuffs at the bottom. The two examples on
the right show results on SewFactory [38]. The pre-trained
SewFormer fails to predict the garment in the top row with
sleeves and the bottom row’s skirt as a pair of pants, while
AIpparel correctly predicts the sewing patterns based on the
inputs.
4.2. Multimodal Garment Generation
We evaluate the effectiveness of AIpparel in various mul-
timodal garment generation scenarios. Specifically, we as-
sess its performance on a set of 100 garments with 5 types
of multimodal inputs (20 test samples each): 1) texts, 2)
images, 3) a combination of text and images, 4) open-ended
prompts that require reasoning, and 5) editing instructions.
Success in such a benchmark requires the model to make
accurate predictions conditioned on a variety of different
multimodal input formats, as well as having an understand-
ing of common-sense knowledge. Refer to Fig. 4 for gener-
ation examples in these tasks. We abbreviate the text input
for compactness. Refer to the supplementary for complete
examples.
Because no existing work handles multimodal sewing
pattern generation, we adopt state-of-the-art (SOTA) single-
modal generative methods, i.e., SewFormer-FT and Dress-
Code, to perform multimodal tasks. For this purpose, we
augment these baselines using multimodal models, e.g.,
GPT-4o [74] and DALL-E [8], to translate the multimodal
inputs to their input domains (i.e., images and short key-
word description). To ensure translation accuracy, we man-
ually inspect the results before querying SewFormer-FT and
DressCode. We denote them as Sewformer-FT† and Dress-


Figure 4. Multimodal Sewing Pattern Prediction (Qualitative).
AIpparel accurately predicts sewing patterns that follows the in-
puts better than the baselines. See Sec. 4.2.
Method
Accuracy (↑)
Panel L2 (↓)
SewFormer-FT†
10.3
22.4
DressCode†
0.6
31.0
AIpparel
59.0
6.1
Table 3. Multimodal Sewing Pattern Prediction. Compared to
single-modal methods augmented with existing LMMs, our model
outperforms both baselines by a large margin.
Code†, respectively. In comparison, our model can directly
perform all five categories of multimodal tasks without re-
lying on external modules.
We report quantitative comparisons in Tab. 3, measured
between the reference and predicted sewing patterns. Com-
pared with single-modal baselines, AIpparel performs sig-
nificantly better. Fig. 4 shows qualitative comparisons. The
first row validates the method’s reasoning ability by asking
for a suitable sewing pattern for a specific occasion (e.g.,
a “semi-formal garden party”). We use DressCode† as our
baseline. Notice that DressCode† generates a mini-skirt that
does not match well the description of a “semi-formal gar-
den party”. Our model outputs a godet skirt that is more
appropriate for this occasion. The second row shows an ex-
ample of sewing pattern generation given a combination of
image and text. SewFormer-FT† fails to generate a plausi-
ble sewing pattern due to the garment’s complexity, whereas
AIpparel reconstructs the complex garment closely follow-
ing both visual and textual cues, such as the sleeve and skirt
length in the image, and the waistline and neckline descrip-
tions in the text.
Figure 5. Sewing Pattern Editing (Qualitative). Our model fol-
lows the editing instructions more accurately compared with the
baseline by accurately including a hood to the tank top (top row)
and elongating the skirt (bottom row). See Sec. 4.3.
Method
Accuracy (↑)
Panel L2 (↓)
Sewformer*
9.5
18.6
DressCode*
37.0
13.7
AIpparel
83.4
1.5
Table 4. Sewing Pattern Editing. We use SOTA LMMs such
as GPT-4V and DALL-E to facilitate both baselines to perform
this multimodal editing task. Our model still outperforms both
baselines by a large margin.
4.3. Language-driven Sewing Pattern Editing
We validate AIpparel’s ability to perform sewing pattern
editing. Given a sewing pattern and text-based editing in-
structions, the model is tasked with editing the pattern ac-
cording to the prompt without altering the overall style of
the garment. Since the existing sewing pattern generation
models, DressCode and SewFormer, are not designed for
this task, we adapt them for editing using a pre-trained In-
structPix2Pix [12] and GPT4o [74]2. We denote them as
DressCode* and SewFormer*, respectively.
We report quantitative comparisons in Tab. 4. Our model
outperforms the baselines in both metrics by a large mar-
gin, indicating that AIpparel performs more accurate edits
than the baselines while minimally affecting the rest of the
sewing patterns. Qualitative results are shown in Fig. 5.
DressCode produces results visibly deviating from the in-
put garment. For example, DressCode changes the tank top
to a full-length dress in the top row and the tight skirt to
2See supplementary for details


Methods
Accuracy (↑)
Panel L2 (↓)
Time (↓)
DressCode
38.4
22.4
52.2s
Ours w.o. reg.
79.0
7.2
3.4s
Ours
85.0
6.1
2.1s
Table 5. Ablation. Our tokenizer outperforms DressCode in all
metrics while being more than 25 times faster at inference time.
Our objective (Eq. 2) also improves performance compared to the
cross-entropy-only variant.
a flared one in the bottom row. These mistakes arise be-
cause DressCode requires external modules to translate the
sewing pattern to short keywords for input, losing impor-
tant information about the original garment style during the
process. In contrast, AIpparel directly accepts the sewing
pattern and textual instructions as input, allowing it to ac-
curately perform the minimal edits required to modify the
garment according to the instructions, as demonstrated in
both examples.
4.4. Ablation Study
We validate our key technical contributions in an ablation
study. Specifically, we compare our tokenizer described in
Sec. 3 with the existing tokenization scheme from Dress-
Code [78]. We also perform an ablation study on our pro-
posed mixed fine-tuning objective in Eq. 2, comparing it
with a cross-entropy-only objective (“Ours w.o. reg”). We
use text-to-garment prediction on DressCode’s dataset as
our ablation task to compare with DressCode’s pre-trained
model. For a fair comparison, we use the same backbone as
DressCode and only change the tokenizer and training ob-
jectives. To implement “Ours w.o. reg.”, we quantize vertex
positions, edge control parameters, and 3D transformations
into 256 bins, which are then predicted using next token
prediction. See the supplementary for implementation de-
tails.
Tab. 5 shows the ablation results compared to our full
model in text-to-garment tasks. The results are averaged
over 100 samples from DressCode’s test set.
Compared
to DressCode, our tokenizer, both with and without regres-
sion loss, significantly improves the reconstruction fidelity,
as demonstrated by the large improvement in the metric
values. Furthermore, by using a mixed training objective
in Eq. 2, the reconstruction quality of sewing patterns im-
proves significantly, demonstrating the effectiveness of our
objective. In addition to quality improvements, our tok-
enization drastically accelerates generation (25× speedup)
compared to DressCode, as shown in the same table. The
reported times show the average wall-clock time required to
generate and decode a single garment in seconds, measured
for each method on a single A6000 GPU. Fig. 6 displays re-
constructed sewing patterns from all three methods. Notice
that DressCode’s prediction does not accurately reflect the
language description (i.e., the top row’s skirt is not flared)
and shows geometry artifacts (bottom row, boxed region).
Meanwhile, our proposed tokenizer and training objective
predict garments with the best visual quality and alignment
with the textual description.
Figure 6. Ablation (Qualitative). DressCode’s tokenizer pro-
duces unrealistic patterns (second row, boxed region) and does not
match the text input (i.e., “flared hem”). In contrast, our tokenizer
outputs geometrically regular sewing patterns accurately aligning
with the inputs. See Sec. 4.4.
5. Discussion
We introduce AIpparel, a 7B-parameter multimodal founda-
tion model for garment sewing patterns. To train AIpparel,
we curate GCD-MM, a large-scale dataset with complex
sewing patterns and multimodal annotations. Moreover, we
develop a novel sewing pattern tokenizer and a mixed train-
ing objective for fine-tuning LMMs on GCD-MM. AIpparel
achieves state-of-the-art results on single-modal and multi-
modal sewing-pattern-generation tasks, enabling new appli-
cations like language-driven sewing pattern editing.
Limitations and Future Work.
While the current rep-
resentation enables the digitalization of complex sewing
patterns, it is still constrained to garments representable
by manifold surfaces.
Design elements like pockets re-
quire non-manifold structures.
A promising direction is
to develop an efficient representation that accurately mod-
els non-manifold features while remaining compatible with
LMMs. Fabricating the generated garments is another in-
teresting direction, which requires consideration of physical
and material constraints during sewing pattern prediction.
Broader Impacts. While we believe our model can ad-
vance AI-assisted fashion design, we acknowledge potential
risks we inherit from the pre-trained LLaVA model. For in-
stance, generative AIs can spread misinformation or create
biases potentially harmful to society. We do not condone
these and other improper usage of our model.


Conclusion. Vision-language and other large multimodal
models capture web knowledge and enable reasoning for
many downstream applications.
By fine-tuning LMMs
to understand sewing patterns, we take first steps to-
wards a vision-language-garment model that transfers web
knowledge to garment generation and editing, unlocking a
plethora of applications for fashion design and fabrication.
6. Acknowledgements
Google, an ERC Consolidator Grant No. 101003104 (MY-
CLOTH), an ARL grant W911NF-21-2-0104, a Vannevar
Bush Faculty Fellowship, and LVMH support the project.
Finally, we thank Stanford’s Marlowe cluster for provid-
ing GPU computing for model training and evaluation.
References
[1] Josh Achiam, Steven Adler, Sandhini Agarwal, Lama Ah-
mad, Ilge Akkaya, Florencia Leoni Aleman, Diogo Almeida,
Janko Altenschmidt, Sam Altman, Shyamal Anadkat, et al.
Gpt-4 technical report.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08774,
2023. 2
[2] Anthropic. Introducing claude 3.5 sonnet, 2024. Accessed:
2024-09-06. 2
[3] Dimitrije Anti´c, Garvita Tiwari, Batuhan Ozcomlekci, Ric-
cardo Marin, and Gerard Pons-Moll. Close: A 3d clothing
segmentation dataset and model. In 2024 International Con-
ference on 3D Vision (3DV), pages 591–601. IEEE, 2024. 2
[4] Helen Joseph Armstrong. Patternmaking for Fashion De-
sign. Pearson India, 2009. 1
[5] Alberto Baldrati, Davide Morelli, Giuseppe Cartella, Mar-
cella Cornia, Marco Bertini, and Rita Cucchiara. Multimodal
garment designer: Human-centric latent diffusion models for
fashion image editing. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF In-
ternational Conference on Computer Vision, pages 23393–
23402, 2023. 2
[6] Seungbae Bang, Maria Korosteleva, and Sung-Hee Lee. Es-
timating garment patterns from static scan data.
In Com-
puter Graphics Forum, pages 273–287. Wiley Online Li-
brary, 2021. 1
[7] Hugo Bertiche, Meysam Madadi, and Sergio Escalera.
Cloth3d: clothed 3d humans. In European Conference on
Computer Vision, pages 344–359. Springer, 2020. 3
[8] James Betker, Gabriel Goh, Li Jing, Tim Brooks, Jianfeng
Wang, Linjie Li, Long Ouyang, Juntang Zhuang, Joyce
Lee, Yufei Guo, et al.
Improving image generation with
better captions.
Computer Science. https://cdn. openai.
com/papers/dall-e-3. pdf, 2(3):8, 2023. 3, 6
[9] Bharat Lal Bhatnagar, Garvita Tiwari, Christian Theobalt,
and Gerard Pons-Moll. Multi-garment net: Learning to dress
3d people from images. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
international conference on computer vision, pages 5420–
5430, 2019. 2
[10] Michael J Black, Priyanka Patel, Joachim Tesch, and Jin-
long Yang. Bedlam: A synthetic dataset of bodies exhibit-
ing detailed lifelike animated motion.
In Proceedings of
the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, pages 8726–8737, 2023. 2
[11] Anthony Brohan, Noah Brown, Justice Carbajal, Yevgen
Chebotar, Xi Chen, Krzysztof Choromanski, Tianli Ding,
Danny Driess, Avinava Dubey, Chelsea Finn, Pete Florence,
Chuyuan Fu, Montse Gonzalez Arenas, Keerthana Gopalakr-
ishnan, Kehang Han, Karol Hausman, Alex Herzog, Jas-
mine Hsu, Brian Ichter, Alex Irpan, Nikhil Joshi, Ryan
Julian, Dmitry Kalashnikov, Yuheng Kuang, Isabel Leal,
Lisa Lee, Tsang-Wei Edward Lee, Sergey Levine, Yao Lu,
Henryk Michalewski, Igor Mordatch, Karl Pertsch, Kan-
ishka Rao, Krista Reymann, Michael Ryoo, Grecia Salazar,
Pannag Sanketi, Pierre Sermanet, Jaspiar Singh, Anikait
Singh, Radu Soricut, Huong Tran, Vincent Vanhoucke, Quan
Vuong, Ayzaan Wahid, Stefan Welker, Paul Wohlhart, Jialin
Wu, Fei Xia, Ted Xiao, Peng Xu, Sichun Xu, Tianhe Yu,
and Brianna Zitkovich. Rt-2: Vision-language-action models
transfer web knowledge to robotic control. In arXiv preprint
arXiv:2307.15818, 2023. 2
[12] Tim Brooks, Aleksander Holynski, and Alexei A. Efros. In-
structpix2pix: Learning to follow image editing instructions.
In CVPR, 2023. 7, 23
[13] Alexandre Carlier, Martin Danelljan, Alexandre Alahi, and
Radu Timofte. Deepsvg: A hierarchical generative network
for vector graphics animation, 2020. 4
[14] Xiaowu Chen, Bin Zhou, Feixiang Lu, Lin Wang, Lang Bi,
and Ping Tan. Garment modeling with a depth camera. ACM
Trans. Graph., 34(6), 2015. 1, 2
[15] Wei-Lin Chiang, Zhuohan Li, Zi Lin, Ying Sheng, Zhang-
hao Wu, Hao Zhang, Lianmin Zheng, Siyuan Zhuang, Yong-
hao Zhuang, Joseph E. Gonzalez, Ion Stoica, and Eric P.
Xing.
Vicuna: An open-source chatbot impressing gpt-4
with 90%* chatgpt quality, 2023. 2
[16] Hein Daanen and Sung-Ae Hong.
Made-to-measure pat-
tern development based on 3d whole body scans. Interna-
tional Journal of Clothing Science and Technology, 20:15–
25, 2008. 2
[17] Luca De Luigi, Ren Li, Benoit Guillard, Mathieu Salzmann,
and Pascal Fua.
Drapenet: Garment generation and self-
supervised draping. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Con-
ference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages
1451–1460, 2023. 2
[18] Philippe Decaudin, Dan Julius, Jamie Wither, Laurence
Boissieux, Alla Sheffer, and Marie-Paule Cani. Virtual gar-
ments: A fully geometric approach for clothing design. Com-
puter Graphics Forum, 25(3):625–634, 2006. 2
[19] Yao Feng, Jing Lin, Sai Kumar Dwivedi, Yu Sun, Priyanka
Patel, and Michael J. Black. Chatpose: Chatting about 3d
human pose. In CVPR, 2024. 2, 5, 25
[20] Nils Hasler, Bodo Rosenhahn, and Hans-Peter Seidel. Re-
verse engineering garments. In Computer Vision/Computer
Graphics Collaboration Techniques, pages 200–211, Berlin,
Heidelberg, 2007. Springer Berlin Heidelberg. 2
[21] Kai He, Kaixin Yao, Qixuan Zhang, Jingyi Yu, Lingjie Liu,
and Lan Xu. Dresscode: Autoregressively sewing and gen-
erating garments from text guidance, 2024. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 14,
17, 18, 19, 23
[22] Hsuan-I Ho, Lixin Xue, Jie Song, and Otmar Hilliges. Learn-
ing locally editable virtual humans.
In Proceedings of
the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, pages 21024–21035, 2023. 2


[23] Edward J. Hu, Yelong Shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-
Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang, and Weizhu Chen.
Lora: Low-rank adaptation of large language models, 2021.
24
[24] Rongjie Huang, Mingze Li, Dongchao Yang, Jiatong Shi,
Xuankai Chang, Zhenhui Ye, Yuning Wu, Zhiqing Hong,
Jiawei Huang, Jinglin Liu, Yi Ren, Zhou Zhao, and Shinji
Watanabe. Audiogpt: Understanding and generating speech,
music, sound, and talking head, 2023. 2
[25] Moon-Hwan Jeong, Dong-Hoon Han, and Hyeong-Seok Ko.
Garment capture from a photograph. Comput. Animat. Vir-
tual Worlds, 26(3–4):291–300, 2015. 2
[26] Boyi Jiang, Juyong Zhang, Yang Hong, Jinhao Luo, Ligang
Liu, and Hujun Bao. Bcnet: Learning body and cloth shape
from a single image. In Computer Vision–ECCV 2020: 16th
European Conference, Glasgow, UK, August 23–28, 2020,
Proceedings, Part XX 16, pages 18–35. Springer, 2020. 2, 3
[27] Yuming Jiang, Shuai Yang, Haonan Qiu, Wayne Wu,
Chen Change Loy, and Ziwei Liu. Text2human: Text-driven
controllable human image generation. ACM Transactions on
Graphics (TOG), 41(4):1–11, 2022. 2
[28] Maria Korosteleva and Sung-Hee Lee. Generating datasets
of 3d garments with sewing patterns. In Proceedings of the
Neural Information Processing Systems Track on Datasets
and Benchmarks, 2021. 3, 17
[29] Maria Korosteleva and Sung-Hee Lee. Neuraltailor: Recon-
structing sewing pattern structures from 3d point clouds of
garments. ACM Trans. Graph., 41(4), 2022. 1, 2, 4, 6, 19
[30] Maria Korosteleva and Olga Sorkine-Hornung.
Garment-
code: Programming parametric sewing patterns. ACM Trans-
actions on Graphics (TOG), 42(6):1–15, 2023. 3, 14, 16, 17,
25
[31] Maria Korosteleva, Timur Levent Kesdogan, Fabian Kem-
per, Stephan Wenninger, Jasmin Koller, Yuhan Zhang, Mario
Botsch, and Olga Sorkine-Hornung. Garmentcodedata: A
dataset of 3d made-to-measure garments with sewing pat-
terns, 2024. 2, 3, 17, 27
[32] Xin Lai, Zhuotao Tian, Yukang Chen, Yanwei Li, Yuhui
Yuan, Shu Liu, and Jiaya Jia. Lisa: Reasoning segmentation
via large language model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.00692,
2023. 2, 5, 25
[33] Boqian Li, Xuan Li, Ying Jiang, Tianyi Xie, Feng Gao,
Huamin Wang, Yin Yang, and Chenfanfu Jiang. Garment-
dreamer: 3dgs guided garment synthesis with diverse geom-
etry and texture details. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.12420,
2024. 2
[34] Kunchang Li, Yinan He, Yi Wang, Yizhuo Li, Wenhai
Wang, Ping Luo, Yali Wang, Limin Wang, and Yu Qiao.
Videochat: Chat-centric video understanding. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2305.06355, 2023. 2
[35] Minchen Li, Danny M. Kaufman, and Chenfanfu Jiang.
Codimensional incremental potential contact. ACM Trans.
Graph. (SIGGRAPH), 40(4), 2021. 25
[36] Haotian Liu, Chunyuan Li, Qingyang Wu, and Yong Jae Lee.
Visual instruction tuning, 2023. 2, 3, 18
[37] Kaixuan Liu, Xianyi Zeng, Pascal Bruniaux, Xuyuan Tao,
Xiaofeng Yao, Victoria Li, and Jianping Wang. 3d interac-
tive garment pattern-making technology.
Computer-Aided
Design, 104:113–124, 2018. 2
[38] Lijuan Liu, Xiangyu Xu, Zhijie Lin, Jiabin Liang, and
Shuicheng Yan. Towards garment sewing pattern reconstruc-
tion from a single image. ACM Transactions on Graphics
(SIGGRAPH Asia), 2023. 2, 3, 4, 6, 14, 17, 18, 19
[39] Zhaoyang Liu, Yinan He, Wenhai Wang, Weiyun Wang, Yi
Wang, Shoufa Chen, Qinglong Zhang, Zeqiang Lai, Yang
Yang, Qingyun Li, Jiashuo Yu, et al.
Interngpt: Solving
vision-centric tasks by interacting with chatgpt beyond lan-
guage. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.05662, 2023. 2
[40] Zhen Luo, Tianxing Li, and Takashi Kanai. Garmatnet: A
learning-based method for predicting 3d garment mesh with
parameterized materials. In Proceedings of the 14th ACM
SIGGRAPH Conference on Motion, Interaction and Games,
pages 1–10, 2021. 2
[41] Qianli Ma, Jinlong Yang, Anurag Ranjan, Sergi Pujades,
Gerard Pons-Moll, Siyu Tang, and Michael J Black. Learn-
ing to dress 3d people in generative clothing. In Proceedings
of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pat-
tern Recognition, pages 6469–6478, 2020. 2
[42] Miles Macklin. Warp: A high-performance python frame-
work for gpu simulation and graphics.
https : / /
github.com/nvidia/warp, 2022.
NVIDIA GPU
Technology Conference (GTC). 25
[43] Yuwei Meng, Charlie C.L. Wang, and Xiaogang Jin. Flexi-
ble shape control for automatic resizing of apparel products.
Computer-Aided Design, 44(1):68–76, 2012. Digital Human
Modeling in Product Design. 2
[44] Gyeongsik Moon, Hyeongjin Nam, Takaaki Shiratori, and
Kyoung Mu Lee. 3d clothed human reconstruction in the
wild.
In European conference on computer vision, pages
184–200. Springer, 2022. 2
[45] Rahul Narain, Armin Samii, and James F O’brien. Adaptive
anisotropic remeshing for cloth simulation. ACM transac-
tions on graphics (TOG), 31(6):1–10, 2012. 3
[46] Fumiya Narita, Shunsuke Saito, Takuya Kato, Tsukasa
Fukusato, and Shigeo Morishima.
Pose-independent gar-
ment transfer. 2014. 1
[47] Charlie Nash, Yaroslav Ganin, S. M. Ali Eslami, and Pe-
ter W. Battaglia.
Polygen: An autoregressive generative
model of 3d meshes, 2020. 5
[48] OpenAI, Josh Achiam, Steven Adler, Sandhini Agarwal,
Lama Ahmad, Ilge Akkaya, Florencia Leoni Aleman, Diogo
Almeida, Janko Altenschmidt, Sam Altman, Shyamal Anad-
kat, Red Avila, Igor Babuschkin, Suchir Balaji, Valerie Bal-
com, Paul Baltescu, Haiming Bao, Mohammad Bavarian,
Jeff Belgum, Irwan Bello, Jake Berdine, Gabriel Bernadett-
Shapiro, Christopher Berner, Lenny Bogdonoff, Oleg Boiko,
Madelaine Boyd, Anna-Luisa Brakman, Greg Brockman,
Tim Brooks, Miles Brundage, Kevin Button, Trevor Cai,
Rosie Campbell, Andrew Cann, Brittany Carey, Chelsea
Carlson, Rory Carmichael, Brooke Chan, Che Chang, Fo-
tis Chantzis, Derek Chen, Sully Chen, Ruby Chen, Ja-
son Chen, Mark Chen, Ben Chess, Chester Cho, Casey
Chu, Hyung Won Chung, Dave Cummings, Jeremiah Cur-
rier, Yunxing Dai, Cory Decareaux, Thomas Degry, Noah
Deutsch, Damien Deville, Arka Dhar, David Dohan, Steve
Dowling, Sheila Dunning, Adrien Ecoffet, Atty Eleti,
Tyna Eloundou, David Farhi, Liam Fedus, Niko Felix,
Sim´on Posada Fishman, Juston Forte, Isabella Fulford, Leo
