Title: Anigs: Animatable gaussian avatar from a single image with inconsistent gaussian reconstruction

AniGS: Animatable Gaussian Avatar from a Single Image with
Inconsistent Gaussian Reconstruction
Lingteng Qiu1*
Shenhao Zhu1,3*
Qi Zuo1*
Xiaodong Gu1*
Yuan Dong1
Junfei Zhang1
Chao Xu1
Zhe Li1,4
Weihao Yuan1
Liefeng Bo1
Guanying Chen2†
Zilong Dong 1†
1Alibaba Group
2Sun Yat-sen University
3Nanjing University
4Huazhong University of Science and Technology
Figure 1. 3D Avatar Reconstruction and Animation Results of AniGS. Given a single human image as input, AniGS is capable of
reconstructing a high-fidelity 3D avatar in a canonical pose, which can be used for both photorealistic rendering and real-time animation.
Abstract
Generating animatable human avatars from a single im-
age is essential for various digital human modeling applica-
tions. Existing 3D reconstruction methods often struggle to
capture fine details in animatable models, while generative
approaches for controllable animation, though avoiding ex-
*Equal contribution.
†Corresponding author.
plicit 3D modeling, suffer from viewpoint inconsistencies in
extreme poses and computational inefficiencies. In this pa-
per, we address these challenges by leveraging the power of
generative models to produce detailed multi-view canonical
pose images, which help resolve ambiguities in animatable
human reconstruction. We then propose a robust method
for 3D reconstruction of inconsistent images, enabling real-
time rendering during inference.
Specifically, we adapt
a transformer-based video generation model to generate
1
arXiv:2412.02684v1  [cs.CV]  3 Dec 2024


multi-view canonical pose images and normal maps, pre-
training on a large-scale video dataset to improve gener-
alization.
To handle view inconsistencies, we recast the
reconstruction problem as a 4D task and introduce an ef-
ficient 3D modeling approach using 4D Gaussian Splat-
ting. Experiments demonstrate that our method achieves
photorealistic, real-time animation of 3D human avatars
from in-the-wild images, showcasing its effectiveness and
generalization capability. Our code will be available on
https://lingtengqiu.github.io/2024/AniGS/.
1. Introduction
Generating animatable human avatars has become increas-
ingly important for a wide range of applications, such as vir-
tual reality, gaming, and human-robot interaction. However,
creating an animatable human avatar with diverse shapes,
appearances, and clothing from a single image remains a
challenging problem.
Despite significant progress in human reconstruction
from a single image [50, 62, 76, 82], the reconstructed mod-
els are often difficult to animate. This is because the recon-
structed human pose is aligned with the input pose, which
is usually non-canonical, requiring complex rigging to en-
able animation. For animatable avatar reconstruction, meth-
ods based on predicting parametric human models (e.g.,
SMPL [46]) with geometry offset refinement often struggle
to capture fine details [3]. Additionally, methods relying on
implicit surface reconstruction face challenges in general-
ization, primarily due to the lack of large-scale, rigged 3D
human datasets for training [20, 29].
Recently, controllable human image animation has made
significant progress with diffusion models [27, 85], which
generate animated images directly. These methods achieve
realistic results and are easy to animate by input control
poses, but suffer from inconsistencies across views due to
the lack of a global representation. In addition, these meth-
ods also face efficiency issues due to the high computational
effort per animation frame.
Motivated by the success of diffusion models in generat-
ing multi-view images of objects [45, 67], several methods
have explored fine-tuning these models to generate multi-
view human images from a single input, followed by 3D re-
construction using multi-view techniques [21, 44]. Specifi-
cally, CharacterGen [53] demonstrates the ability to gener-
ate cartoon-style avatars from a single image by first pro-
ducing multi-view canonical pose images. To reconstruct
the 3D model from these potentially inconsistent multi-
view images, a transformer-based 3D reconstruction model
is trained. However, training both the multi-view diffusion
model and the reconstruction model requires a synthetic 3D
rigged human dataset to render multi-view canonical im-
ages, limiting the generalization ability of these models.
To address these challenges, we adapt a transformer-
based video generation model [26] to predict multi-view
images and normal maps, by incorporating guidance sup-
port from the reference image and human poses. Our gener-
ation model can be trained on large-scale, in-the-wild video
data, thereby enhancing its generalization.
Despite the high-quality multi-view images generated by
our method, inconsistencies still arise, which can affect the
3D reconstruction.
By considering these inconsistencies
as the dynamic variations within a temporal sequence, we
can reformulate the problem of 3D reconstruction from in-
consistent images as a 4D reconstruction task. Observing
the effectiveness of 4D Gaussian splatting (4DGS) in dy-
namic scene modeling [47, 73, 79], we introduce an effi-
cient 4DGS to fit the multi-view images. After optimiza-
tion, the high-fidelity 3D avatar model can be obtained as
the model in the canonical space of the 4DGS (see Fig. 1).
In summary, the key contributions of this paper are as
follows:
• We introduce a method for multi-view canonical pose im-
age generation using a video generation model, trained on
unconstrained human pose video data, without the need
for synthetic 3D rigged human datasets.
• We introduce a new perspective to the problem of 3D an-
imatable avatar reconstruction from inconsistent images,
formulating it as a 4D reconstruction task and introducing
an efficient 4D Gaussian Splatting model.
• Experiments demonstrate that our method generates high-
fidelity animatable avatars from a single image, enabling
photorealistic and real-time animation during inference.
2. Related Work
Single-Image Human Reconstruction and Generation
Early methods for single-image human reconstruction pri-
marily formulated this problem as geometry offset predic-
tion for mesh-based statistical models for naked [15, 32, 36,
37, 63, 68, 70] or clothed [2, 4, 5, 8, 30, 40, 55, 74, 84] hu-
man body, with some approaches extending this to texture
prediction [5, 8]. While a consistent naked topology simpli-
fies animation, it is less effective for modeling diverse cloth-
ing styles. To deal with the cloth-style variation in the wild,
numerous notable approaches [6, 10, 16, 61, 62, 76, 77, 82,
83] utilize implicit functions as representations for 3D hu-
man models, enabling them to capture complex topologies
without suffering from resolution constraints.
Recently, the rise of generative models has blurred
the boundaries between reconstruction and generation pro-
cesses. Some methods [21, 44, 48] utilize the input image
as a conditional element, leveraging generative techniques
such as GANs [17, 25, 48, 78], Image Diffusion Mod-
els [12], and Video Diffusion Models [44, 66] to synthesize
3D human models. The concurrent work MagicMan [21]
2


has explored the idea of generating multi-view human im-
ages and normal maps given the input image. Unlike these
methods, which generate static models, our approach gen-
erates multi-view canonical pose images, followed by 3D
modeling to reconstruct animatable human models.
Animatable Human Generation Reconstructing animat-
able avatars remains a challenging problem. Early meth-
ods often adopt a parametric-model-based solution [3].
To better model the clothed human body, methods like
ARCH [20, 29] adopts an implicit function representation
to represent the geometry of the human body. Other works
focus on animatable avatar reconstruction from monocular
videos [31, 43, 58, 72] or multi-view videos [13, 41, 54].
With the advent of text-to-3D techniques [56], several
methods have explored generating 3D avatars from text
prompts [11, 28, 38].
Recently,
CharacterGen [53] achieves cartoon-style
avatar generation from a single image by generating
multi-view images with a diffusion model, followed by
transformer-based shape reconstruction.
In contrast, our
work focuses on in-the-wild animatable human avatars, us-
ing a video generation model pretrained on large-scale in-
the-wild videos to improve generalization. Additionally, we
propose a robust 3D reconstruction method based on 4DGS,
avoiding the need for training a transformer reconstruction
model.
Controllable Human Image Animation Original 2D dif-
fusion models [60] primarily focus on generating single-
view images and do not support human animation. Ani-
mate Anyone [27] introduces a reference net into the diffu-
sion models to preserve the identity of the input image and
incorporates a lightweight, pose-guided network for guid-
ance. Champ [85], MIMO [49], and Human4DiT [66] em-
ploy 3D-level shape guidance [46, 51] rather than sparse 2D
keypoints, enabling more accurate, controllable image gen-
eration under human attributes conditions.
Although they can produce vivid human-centric anima-
tion videos, body distortion, and identity mutation often oc-
cur when the animated human turns back at wide angles.
Additionally, these methods require several minutes to gen-
erate a video sequence given the human poses [66, 85], lim-
iting their practicality in interactive applications. In con-
trast, by leveraging an explicit high-fidelity 3D Gaussian
model, our methods achieves real-time photorealistic ren-
dering at inference time.
3. Preliminary
Human Parametric Model
The SMPL [46] and SMPL-
X [51] parametric models are widely used for human body
representation. These models utilize skinning techniques
and blend shapes derived from a dataset of thousands of 3D
body scans. Specifically, SMPL-X employs shape parame-
ters β ∈R20 and pose parameters θ ∈R55×3 to represent
body mesh deformations.
Diffusion Transformer Model for Video Generation
Diffusion Probabilistic Models [22, 69] use a forward
Markov chain to gradually transform a sample x0 drawn
from the data distribution p(x) into a noisy equivalent q(x):
q(xt) = √αt · x0 +
√
1 −αt · ϵ, t ∈(0, T),
(1)
where ϵ ∼N(0, I) denotes Gaussian noise, T is the final
time step, t is the current time step, and αt is the noisy
schedule parameter.
The CogVideo model [26, 80] is an open-source Text-to-
Video (T2V) diffusion model that employs a Transformer
architecture [52], referred to as µθ, to model the reverse
diffusion process. The transformer model processes the cur-
rent noisy sample xt, the associated time step t, and optional
conditioning inputs c to estimate the noise ϵ. The loss func-
tion for training the denoising model is:
Lθ = Ex0,c,t ∥x0 −µθ(xt, c, t)∥2 .
(2)
3D Gaussian Splatting
3D Gaussian Splatting [33] rep-
resents 3D data using a collection of 3D Gaussians. Each
Gaussian is defined by a center x ∈R3, a scaling factor
s ∈R3, and a rotation quaternion q ∈R4.
Addition-
ally, it includes an opacity value α ∈R and a color feature
c ∈RC for rendering purposes, with spherical harmonics
capturing view-dependent effects. Rendering these Gaus-
sians involves projecting them onto the image plane as 2D
Gaussians and applying alpha compositing for each pixel in
a front-to-back order. Recent methods [47, 73, 79] extend
3D Gaussian Splatting to capture dynamic 4D scenes by in-
corporating a temporal embedding.
4. Method
4.1. Overview
Given an input human image I ∈RH×W ×3, our goal is
to create an animatable 3D avatar represented by a 3DGS
model. This avatar can be animated by applying new hu-
man pose conditions during inference. To facilitate anima-
tion, it is crucial to reconstruct the 3D avatar in a canonical
pose, simplifying the rigging process. The 3D avatar in this
canonical pose can be rigged using the aligned SMPL-X
model or other off-the-shelf rigging methods [1]. As shown
in Fig. 2, our framework consists of two main stages.
In the first stage, we employ a reference image-guided
video generation model to produce high-quality multi-view
canonical human images and their corresponding normals
from the input image. In the second stage, we reconstruct
the 3D model using these generated images.
However,
despite the high quality of the generated images, multi-
view inconsistencies still arise due to the nature of the
3


Fusion-DiT
SMPL-X Cond
Coarse Mesh Initialization
4DGS Initialization 
T
3
6
9
12
 Image&&Normal
Time-dependent
Deformation
Optimized 4DGS
VAE
Encoder
❄
VAE
Decoder
❄
Image Proj
🔥
Template 
Encoder
🔥
Token  Split
Template Proj
Multi-View Image
Multi-View Normal
(a) Multi-view Canonical Image Generation
(b) 3D Reconstruction from Inconsistent Images
Figure 2. Overview of the proposed AniGS. In the first stage, a reference image-guided video generation model is employed to produce
high-quality multi-view canonical human images along with their corresponding normals, based on the input image. In the second stage, a
robust 3D model reconstruction method is applied, using 4D Gaussian Splatting (4DGS) optimization to handle subtle appearance variations
across the generated views.
diffusion-based video generation model. Consequently, di-
rectly applying traditional multi-view reconstruction meth-
ods to these images often results in the loss of detail and the
introduction of artifacts.
To tackle the issue of view inconsistencies, we formu-
late this problem as a 4D reconstruction task and introduce
an efficient 4D Gaussian Splatting model to account for
the appearance variations at different timesteps (i.e., view-
points). After optimization, a high-fidelity 3D model can be
obtained as the model in the canonical space of the 4DGS.
4.2. Multi-view Canonical Image Generation
Given a reference human image in an arbitrary pose, our
goal in the first stage is to generate multi-view RGB im-
ages of the same subject in a canonical pose. Motivated by
recent successes in controllable image generation through
video models [27, 80], we adapt a diffusion transformer-
based video generation model to reposition the human sub-
ject to a canonical pose and generate multi-view images.
Specifically, the video generation model takes as input
the reference image and SMPL-X pose conditions to pro-
duce multi-view images. Here, the rotation of the camera
in relation to the subject is treated as equivalent to subject
rotation.
Reference-guided Canonical Video Generation
We ex-
tend the CogVideo model [26] to achieve reference image-
guided and SMPL-X pose-guided video generation. This
model includes a transformer-based denoiser and a Varia-
tional Autoencoder (VAE) that maps input videos or images
into a high-dimensional latent space.
The reference image I is first encoded into VAE features
Fi ∈RB×1×C×HW , while the latent representations for
video noise are denoted by Fv ∈RB×f×C×HW , where B
represents the batch size, f the number of output frames,
C the number of latent feature channels, and HW the total
number of input feature tokens.
To ensure that generated multi-view images retain the
identity of the reference image, we fuse the reference image
features and latent features during the denoising process.
We achieve this by concatenating the reference image fea-
tures and latent features along the frame channel, yielding
Fc ∈RB×(f+1)×C×HW at each DiT block, which allows
for feature interaction through self-attention.
To guide the video generation with input human poses,
we integrate a lightweight pose guidance network inspired
by CHAMP [85]. This network extracts guidance features
from the canonical SMPL-X normal, Nsmplx, which are
added to the corresponding noisy latents to direct the de-
noising process.
Joint Multi-view RGB and Normal Generation
To
enhance multi-view reconstruction with normal supervi-
sion [14, 45], we further extend the video generation frame-
work to simultaneously produce multi-view RGB images
and normal maps, conditioned on a reference image and
its corresponding normal map, as predicted by an existing
method [14].
We employ the CogVideo-2B architecture [80] as our
base model, which comprises 30 DiT blocks. We modify
the first three DiT blocks into two branches, one for RGB
and the other for normal inputs. Similarly, we modify the
last three DiT blocks into two branches that simultaneously
output multi-view RGB images and normal maps.
To effectively integrate image and normal features, we
first share the weights of the middle 24 DiT blocks for both
RGB and normal feature processing. Secondly, we insert
a multi-modal attention module between every three shared
DiT blocks and the head of the middle DiT blocks. For
this multi-modal attention block, we concatenate the RGB
and normal features at the token level, resulting in Fm ∈
RB×f×C×2HW .
4


Training Strategy To enhance the generalization capabil-
ities of our model in the face of limited large-scale syn-
thetic datasets, we first pre-train the video generation model
on a large-scale, in-the-wild dataset consisting of 100,000
single-human animation videos. As ground-truth normal
maps are unavailable for in-the-wild data, we use Sapi-
ens [34] and Multi-HMR [7] to generate pseudo labels for
both normal maps and SMPL-X human poses. During train-
ing, we randomly sample frames from these videos to pre-
dict short video segments.
Following pre-training, we generate synthetic 3D data
assets to obtain self-rotated RGB images along with cor-
responding ground-truth normal maps.
To maintain the
model’s generalizability, we use a training strategy that al-
locates 10% probability to in-the-wild data and 90% to syn-
thetic data.
4.3. 3D Reconstruction from Inconsistent Images
Once multi-view images are generated by the diffusion
model, we can reconstruct a 3D Gaussian human model in
canonical space. However, due to subtle appearance varia-
tions across views in the generated images, directly apply-
ing 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) optimization degrades
the quality of the reconstructed avatar (see Fig. 3).
Problem Formulation To address the challenges of 3D re-
construction from inconsistent views, it is necessary to han-
dle the shape and appearance variations in each view. View-
ing these inconsistencies as analogous to dynamic varia-
tions within a temporal sequence, we can reformulate the
problem of 3D reconstruction from inconsistent images as a
4D reconstruction task. Inspired by the recent success of 4D
Gaussian Splatting in dynamic scene modeling [47, 73, 79],
we adopt a 4DGS approach to achieve efficient optimization
and rendering.
The 4DGS framework is composed of a canonical space
and a per-frame deformation module. The canonical space
represents a static 3D model (e.g., defined as the first
frame), while the per-frame deformation module estimates
shape and color variations of each 3D Gaussian, condi-
tioned on the frame index, to fit the video sequence.
Our goal is to optimize both the canonical space and
the deformation module based on the generated inconsistent
images. Once optimized, this process yields a multi-view
consistent Gaussian avatar model representing the shape in
canonical space.
4D Gaussian Splatting Model
Following existing dy-
namic Gaussian splatting methods [73], the deformation
of 3D Gaussians is modeled by a deformation field net-
work. We employ an efficient spatial-temporal encoder ar-
chitecture consisting of a multi-resolution HexPlane and a
compact MLP [9, 18, 65]. This structure encodes both the
temporal and spatial features information of 3D Gaussians
across six 2D voxel planes, incorporating temporal effects.
（a) Multi-view Inconsistence
（b) Multi-view Reconstruction
3DGS
Ours
Figure 3. Inconsistencies caused by subtle variations in the gener-
ated multi-view images, which will degrade the 3D reconstruction
quality. The red boxes highlights the inconsistent areas.
Once the 3D Gaussians features are encoded, separate
MLPs are employed to compute the deformation for posi-
tion ∆x, rotation ∆r, and scaling ∆s. Then, the deformed
3D Gaussian (x′, r′, s′) can be expressed as:
(x′, r′, s′) = (x + ∆x, r + ∆r, s + ∆s).
(3)
Shape Regularization
In multi-view generation, both
RGB images and normal maps are produced, allowing us
to regularize the 4DGS optimization process using surface
normal regularization. Specifically, we apply an L1 loss on
the rendered normals, Lnormal, to guide the optimization.
To mitigate the occurrence of spikes artifacts during
avatar animation, which is often due to excessively large
or elongated 3D Gaussian ellipsoids, we incorporate an
anisotropy regularizer, Lar, to constrain the shape of the 3D
Gaussians, following [75].
4DGS Optimization
In line with existing reconstruction
methods [33, 57, 64], we employ L1 loss for both color
Lcolor and mask supervision Lmask. We also include a grid-
based total variation loss, Ltv, as proposed in [73], to pro-
mote smooth deformation across views.
For the human
mask labels, we obtain pseudo ground-truth masks using
SAM2 [59]. The total reconstruction loss is formulated as:
Lr = Lcolor + λmLmask + λnLnormal + λtvLtv + λar · Lar,
(4)
where the weights for different loss terms are set as λm =
0.1, λn = 0.05, λar = 0.001, and λtv = 1.
Point Cloud Initialization of 4DGS Point cloud initializa-
tion is critical for 3DGS optimization. We begin by gener-
ating a coarse mesh from the multi-view images and sample
points on its surface to initialize the 3DGS points.
Specifically, we deform the predicted SMPL-X mesh to
fit the generated multi-view RGB masks and normal maps.
5


We use the Nvidiffrast rasterizer [39] to render both the
foreground and normal map of the deformed mesh. To re-
duce artifacts caused by inconsistencies in the multi-view
images, we apply a Laplacian loss and an edge loss to regu-
larize the mesh deformation. Further details are provided in
the supplementary materials.
4.4. Animation
The reconstructed avatar is represented in a canonical space,
aligned spatially with the canonical pose of the human
body parametric model, SMPL-X. This alignment enables
us to use SMPL-X driving parameters to animate the recon-
structed avatar, making it fully animatable in 3D. To better
handle cloth with large deformation, we apply a diffusion-
based skinning method [42, 58], which transfers SMPL-
X skinning weights throughout the entire human canonical
space. During animation, skinning weights are obtained by
querying the weights in space via bilinear interpolation. Ad-
ditional details are provided in the supplementary materials.
5. Experiments
In this section, we thoroughly evaluate the effectiveness of
our proposed methods by conducting a comprehensive com-
parison with state-of-the-art approaches.
Training Datasets For training the multi-view generation
model, we first conduct a pretraining phase using a large
dataset of dynamic human videos. Specifically, we collect
approximately 200,000 dynamic human videos from vari-
ous online sources. From this, we manually select single-
person videos to create our in-the-wild training dataset,
which consists of around 100,000 video samples. During
the fine-tuning phase, we leverage a combination of public
synthetic 3D datasets to render multi-view images. These
datasets include 2K2K [19], Thuman2.0, Thuman2.1 [81],
and CustomHumans [23], along with commercial datasets
such as Thwindom and RenderPeople. Note that no rigged
human models are used for training. In total, we utilize
6,124 synthetic human scans.
Inference
Our model can generate an animatable 3D
avatar in a canonical pose within a few minutes using a sin-
gle RTX-3090 GPU. Specifically, it takes approximately 5
minutes to generate 30 frames of multi-view RGB and nor-
mal images. The 4DGS optimization process takes around
5 minutes. Once the multi-view reconstruction is complete,
we set the time parameter t = 0 to obtain the final Gaussian
point clouds. After optimization, the avatar can be animated
and rendered in real time.
5.1. Comparison with Existing Methods
Evaluation Dataset
We choose 50 rigged human avatars
from Human4DiT [66] to evaluate our performance on
multi-view canonical-pose image generation and 3D recon-
Table 1. Quantitative results on multi-view canonical image gen-
eration.
+ denotes using our generated canonical pose image as
input, and * indicates that we fine-tune this approach on the multi-
view synthetic dataset. Normal Loss is the cosine similarity loss
between the predicted and ground-truth normal.
Methods
PSNR ↑
SSIM ↑
LPIPS ↓
Normal Loss ↓
MagicMan+ [85]
23.775
0.911
0.1077
0.134
CHAMP* [85]
20.025
0.894
0.1458
-
Ours
23.125
0.907
0.1023
0.101
Table 2. Quantitative comparison of 3D modeling on Human4DiT
Synthetic Datasets.
Methods
LPIPS ↓
CLIP score ↑
FID ↓
User ↑
SiTH [82]
0.1607
86.854
86.895
2.134
LGM [71]
0.1567
86.686
82.121
2.617
MagicMan [21]
0.1479
82.693
144.642
2.095
CharacterGen [53]
0.1638
87.154
88.751
2.481
En3D [48]
0.1576
82.975
131.32
2.549
Ours
0.1085
90.370
77.879
4.199
struction metrics. For animation metrics, we use Blender
software to obtain ground-truth video sequences and export
the motion sequence to drive the created human models. We
then compute photometric metrics in the foreground area to
evaluate our performance on animation.
Baselines Our pipeline includes canonical multi-view gen-
eration, multi-view reconstruction, and human animation.
For the multi-view generation task, we choose the state-
of-the-art MagicMan [21] and CHAMP [85] as baselines.
Notably, since CHAMP does not specifically train on self-
rotated synthetic human datasets, we fine-tune this approach
on our rendering datasets for a fair comparison.
For multi-view canonical human reconstruction tasks,
we compare with the animatable human generation meth-
ods [48], CharacterGen [53]. Additionally, we also con-
ducted comparison experiments with static clothed hu-
man reconstruction methods, including SiTH [24], Mag-
icMan [21], and LGM [71] using our generated canonical
pose image input. For human animation, we conduct com-
parison experiments with En3D and CharacterGen on the
synthetic dataset.
Evaluation on Multi-view Canonical Generation
As
reported in Table 1, our method outperforms CHAMP in
multi-view image generation, clearly demonstrating its ef-
fectiveness. It is important to note that MagicMan [21] is
specifically designed for multi-view generation of static hu-
mans and cannot generate canonical pose images. There-
fore, we use our generated canonical pose images as in-
put for MagicMan. While MagicMan achieves better PSNR
metrics, it is not suitable for animatable avatar generation.
Additionally, our method achieves lower normal errors in
the generated normal maps, further emphasizing its supe-
6


Animate
Anyone
Champ
En3D
Ours
Figure 4. Visual comparison of animation results for the reconstructed 3D avatars. Best viewed with zoom-in.
rior performance.
Evaluation on Canonical Shape Reconstruction
To as-
sess the quality of canonical shape reconstruction, we ren-
der each reconstructed model from 24 different views and
compute LPIPS and FID scores. The average CLIP score
is computed by comparing the input RGB image with all
rendered views.
Since this evaluation is closely related to generation
tasks, we also conduct a user study to assess the similarity
between the generated model and the ground truth. We ran-
domly sample 20 cases and carry out an anonymous ranking
survey with 40 participants across all baselines. The final
metric represents the average ranking score, with a max-
imum score of 5 for each model. As shown in Table 2,
our method consistently outperforms the baselines on all the
metrics, justifying its design.
As demonstrated in Figure 5, our method produces sig-
nificantly better canonical pose shape reconstructions than
previous methods, with higher fidelity to the input image
and enhanced sharpness in both texture and body shape de-
tails (e.g., clothing, faces, and hands). Note that since the
texture refinement code for MagicMan [21] has not been re-
leased, the 3D reconstruction results for MagicMan do not
include texture refinement.
Evaluation on Human Animation
We compare the an-
imation sequences of different methods with the rendered
Table 3. Quantitative results on human animation.
Methods
PSNR ↑
SSIM ↑
LPIPS ↓
CharacterGen [53]
17.570
0.644
0.205
En3D [21]
19.244
0.751
0.174
Ours
21.475
0.857
0.137
ground-truth sequences.
As is demonstrated in Table 3,
our method outperforms the baseline methods in terms of
rendering quality in the animation sequences. Compared
to the second-best method En3D, our method achieves im-
provements of 2.231, 0.106, and 0.037 in PSNR, SSIM, and
LIPIS, respectively. As is visualized in Fig. 4, our method
produces accurate and photorealistic animation results than
the baseline methods. More results are included in the sup-
plementary materials.
5.2. Ablation Study
Shape Regularization
We conduct an ablation study to
evaluate the design of the shape regularization. Specifically,
Fig. 6 (a) demonstrates that normal regularization effec-
tively reduces random noise and enhances surface details,
while Fig. 6 (b) shows that anisotropic regularization helps
eliminate spikes in novel pose animations.
Initialization of 4DGS
Figure 7 compares the results of
4DGS optimization using random points, SMPL mesh, and
7


SiTH
MagicMan(w/o TR)       
LGM              
+ Our Cano. Img
+ Our Cano. Img
+ Our Cano. Img
Input Image
CharacterGen
En3D
Ours
Figure 5. Visual comparison on canonical pose 3D avatar reconstruction from the single-view image. Since SiTH, MagicMan, and LGM
cannot reconstruct canonical pose shapes from the input, we take our generated front-view canonical pose image as input to these methods.
w/o Lnormal
w/ Lnormal
w/o Lnormal
w/ Lnormal
(a) Effects of the normal regularization Lnormal
Input
Pose
w/o Lar
w/ Lar
(b) Effects of the anisotropic regularization Lar
Figure 6. Ablation study for the shape regularization.
the proposed coarse mesh as initialization.
Without any shape prior, the Gaussian model initialized
Input Image
Random Init.
SMPL Init.
Our Init.
Figure 7. Ablation study for shape initialization strategy.
with random points struggles to optimize, resulting in blurry
outputs. Initializing with the SMPL mesh provides a better
shape prior for body representation but faces difficulties in
accurately modeling points that are farther from the body.
In contrast, the coarse mesh initialization provides a good
starting point for the optimization.
6. Conclusion
In this work, we present a robust approach to generate ani-
matable human avatars from a single image. We introduce
8


a reference image-guided video generation model to pro-
duce high-quality multi-view canonical human images and
their corresponding normal maps. To handle view inconsis-
tencies, we propose a 4D Gaussian Splatting (4DGS)-based
method for reconstructing high-fidelity 3D avatars. Com-
prehensive evaluation demonstrates that our method enables
photorealistic, real-time animation of 3D human avatars
from in-the-wild images.
Limitations and Future Work
While our method sup-
ports real-time inference, it still requires several minutes to
optimize an animatable avatar. In future work, we aim to
explore feed-forward 3D reconstruction techniques that are
robust to multi-view inconsistencies.
References
[1] actorcore. accurig, a software for automatic character rig-
ging, 2023. 3
[2] Thiemo Alldieck, Marcus Magnor, Weipeng Xu, Christian
Theobalt, and Gerard Pons-Moll. Detailed human avatars
from monocular video. In 3DV, 2018. 2
[3] Thiemo Alldieck, Marcus Magnor, Weipeng Xu, Christian
Theobalt, and Gerard Pons-Moll. Video based reconstruction
of 3d people models. In CVPR, 2018. 2, 3
[4] Thiemo Alldieck, Marcus Magnor, Bharat Lal Bhatnagar,
Christian Theobalt, and Gerard Pons-Moll. Learning to re-
construct people in clothing from a single rgb camera. In
CVPR, 2019. 2
[5] Thiemo Alldieck, Gerard Pons-Moll, Christian Theobalt,
and Marcus Magnor. Tex2shape: Detailed full human body
geometry from a single image. In CVPR, 2019. 2
[6] Thiemo Alldieck, Mihai Zanfir, and Cristian Sminchisescu.
Photorealistic monocular 3d reconstruction of humans wear-
ing clothing. In CVPR, 2022. 2
[7] Fabien Baradel*, Matthieu Armando, Salma Galaaoui, Ro-
main Br´egier, Philippe Weinzaepfel, Gr´egory Rogez, and
Thomas Lucas*. Multi-hmr: Multi-person whole-body hu-
man mesh recovery in a single shot. In ECCV, 2024. 5
[8] Bharat Lal Bhatnagar, Garvita Tiwari, Christian Theobalt,
and Gerard Pons-Moll. Multi-garment net: Learning to dress
3d people from images. In CVPR, 2019. 2
[9] Ang Cao and Justin Johnson. Hexplane: A fast representa-
tion for dynamic scenes. CVPR, 2023. 5
[10] Yukang Cao, Guanying Chen, Kai Han, Wenqi Yang, and
Kwan-Yee K Wong. Jiff: Jointly-aligned implicit face func-
tion for high quality single view clothed human reconstruc-
tion. In CVPR, 2022. 2
[11] Yukang Cao, Yan-Pei Cao, Kai Han, Ying Shan, and Kwan-
Yee K Wong. Dreamavatar: Text-and-shape guided 3d hu-
man avatar generation via diffusion models. In CVPR, 2024.
3
[12] Mingjin Chen, Junhao Chen, Xiaojun Ye, Huan-ang Gao, Xi-
aoxue Chen, Zhaoxin Fan, and Hao Zhao. Ultraman: Single
image 3d human reconstruction with ultra speed and detail.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.12028, 2024. 2
[13] Yushuo Chen, Zerong Zheng, Zhe Li, Chao Xu, and
Yebin Liu.
Meshavatar:
Learning high-quality triangu-
lar human avatars from multi-view videos. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2407.08414, 2024. 3
[14] Ye Chongjie, Qiu Lingteng, Gu Xiaodong, Zuo Qi, Wu
Yushuang, Dong Zilong, Bo Liefeng, Xiu Yuliang, and Han
Xiaoguang. Stablenormal: Reducing diffusion variance for
stable and sharp normal. TOG, 2024. 4
[15] Vasileios Choutas, Lea Muller, Chun-Hao P. Huang, Siyu
Tang, Dimitrios Tzionas, and Michael J. Black. Accurate 3d
body shape regression using metric and semantic attributes.
In CVPR, 2022. 2
[16] Enric
Corona,
Mihai
Zanfir,
Thiemo
Alldieck,
Ed-
uard Gabriel Bazavan, Andrei Zanfir, and Cristian Sminchis-
escu. Structured 3d features for reconstructing controllable
avatars. In CVPR, 2023. 2
[17] Zijian Dong, Xu Chen, Jinlong Yang, Michael J. Black, Ot-
mar Hilliges, and Andreas Geiger. Ag3d: Learning to gen-
erate 3d avatars from 2d image collections. In ICCV, 2023.
2
[18] Jiemin Fang, Taoran Yi, Xinggang Wang, Lingxi Xie, Xi-
aopeng Zhang, Wenyu Liu, Matthias Nießner, and Qi Tian.
Fast dynamic radiance fields with time-aware neural voxels.
In SIGGRAPH Asia, 2022. 5
[19] Sang-Hun Han, Min-Gyu Park, Ju Hong Yoon, Ju-Mi Kang,
Young-Jae Park, and Hae-Gon Jeon. High-fidelity 3d hu-
man digitization from single 2k resolution images. In CVPR,
2023. 6, 12
[20] Tong He, Yuanlu Xu, Shunsuke Saito, Stefano Soatto, and
Tony Tung. Arch++: Animation-ready clothed human re-
construction revisited. In ICCV, 2021. 2, 3
[21] Xu He, Xiaoyu Li, Di Kang, Jiangnan Ye, Chaopeng Zhang,
Liyang Chen, Xiangjun Gao, Han Zhang, Zhiyong Wu, and
Haolin Zhuang. Magicman: Generative novel view synthesis
of humans with 3d-aware diffusion and iterative refinement.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.14211, 2024. 2, 6, 7
[22] Ajay Ho, Jonathan dand Jain and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising
diffusion probabilistic models. NeurIPS, 2020. 3
[23] Hsuan-I Ho, Lixin Xue, Jie Song, and Otmar Hilliges. Learn-
ing locally editable virtual humans. In CVPR, 2023. 6, 12
[24] I Ho, Jie Song, Otmar Hilliges, et al.
Sith: Single-view
textured human reconstruction with image-conditioned dif-
fusion. In CVPR, 2024. 6
[25] Fangzhou Hong, Zhaoxi Chen, Yushi Lan, Liang Pan, and
Ziwei Liu. Eva3d: Compositional 3d human generation from
2d image collections. In ICLR, 2023. 2
[26] Wenyi Hong, Ming Ding, Wendi Zheng, Xinghan Liu,
and Jie Tang.
Cogvideo:
Large-scale pretraining for
text-to-video generation via transformers.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2205.15868, 2022. 2, 3, 4
[27] Li Hu. Animate anyone: Consistent and controllable image-
to-video synthesis for character animation. In CVPR, 2024.
2, 3, 4
[28] Yukun Huang, Jianan Wang, Ailing Zeng, He Cao, Xianbiao
Qi, Yukai Shi, Zheng-Jun Zha, and Lei Zhang. Dreamwaltz:
Make a scene with complex 3d animatable avatars. NeurIPS,
2024. 3
9


[29] Zeng Huang, Yuanlu Xu, Christoph Lassner, Hao Li, and
Tony Tung. Arch: Animatable reconstruction of clothed hu-
mans. In CVPR, 2020. 2, 3
[30] Boyi Jiang, Juyong Zhang, Yang Hong, Jinhao Luo, Ligang
Liu, and Hujun Bao. Bcnet: Learning body and cloth shape
from a single image. In ECCV, 2020. 2
[31] Boyi Jiang, Yang Hong, Hujun Bao, and Juyong Zhang. Sel-
frecon: Self reconstruction your digital avatar from monoc-
ular video. In CVPR, 2022. 3
[32] Angjoo Kanazawa, Michael J. Black, David W. Jacobs, and
Jitendra Malik. End-to-end recovery of human shape and
pose. In CVPR, 2018. 2
[33] Bernhard Kerbl, Georgios Kopanas, Thomas Leimk¨uhler,
and George Drettakis.
3d gaussian splatting for real-time
radiance field rendering. TOG, 2023. 3, 5
[34] Rawal Khirodkar, Timur Bagautdinov, Julieta Martinez, Su
Zhaoen, Austin James, Peter Selednik, Stuart Anderson, and
Shunsuke Saito. Sapiens: Foundation for human vision mod-
els. In ECCV, 2024. 5, 12
[35] Diederik P. Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for
stochastic optimization. CoRR, 2014. 12
[36] Muhammed Kocabas, Nikos Athanasiou, and Michael J.
Black.
Vibe: Video inference for human body pose and
shape estimation. In CVPR, 2020. 2
[37] Nikos Kolotouros, Georgios Pavlakos, Michael J. Black, and
Kostas Daniilidis. Learning to reconstruct 3d human pose
and shape via model-fitting in the loop. In ICCV, 2019. 2
[38] Nikos Kolotouros, Thiemo Alldieck, Andrei Zanfir, Ed-
uard Bazavan, Mihai Fieraru, and Cristian Sminchisescu.
Dreamhuman: Animatable 3d avatars from text. NeurIPS,
2024. 3
[39] Samuli Laine, Janne Hellsten, Tero Karras, Yeongho Seol,
Jaakko Lehtinen, and Timo Aila.
Modular primitives for
high-performance differentiable rendering. TOG, 2020. 6
[40] Verica Lazova, Eldar Insafutdinov, and Gerard Pons-Moll.
360-degree textures of people in clothing from a single im-
age. In 3DV, 2019. 2
[41] Zhe Li, Zerong Zheng, Lizhen Wang, and Yebin Liu. Ani-
matable gaussians: Learning pose-dependent gaussian maps
for high-fidelity human avatar modeling. In CVPR, 2024. 3
[42] Siyou Lin, Hongwen Zhang, Zerong Zheng, Ruizhi Shao,
and Yebin Liu. Learning implicit templates for point-based
clothed human modeling. In ECCV, 2022. 6, 12
[43] Shiyu Liu, Zibo Zhao, Yihao Zhi, Yiqun Zhao, Binbin
Huang, Shuo Wang, Ruoyu Wang, Michael Xuan, Zhengxin
Li, and Shenghua Gao. Heromaker: Human-centric video
editing with motion priors. In ACM Multimedia 2024, 2024.
3
[44] Zhibin Liu, Haoye Dong, Aviral Chharia, and Hefeng Wu.
Human-vdm:
Learning single-image 3d human gaussian
splatting from video diffusion models.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2409.02851, 2024. 2
[45] Xiaoxiao Long, Yuan-Chen Guo, Cheng Lin, Yuan Liu,
Zhiyang Dou, Lingjie Liu, Yuexin Ma, Song-Hai Zhang,
Marc Habermann, Christian Theobalt, et al. Wonder3d: Sin-
gle image to 3d using cross-domain diffusion.
In CVPR,
2024. 2, 4
[46] Matthew Loper, Naureen Mahmood, Javier Romero, Gerard
Pons-Moll, and Michael J Black. Smpl: a skinned multi-
person linear model. TOG, 2015. 2, 3
[47] Jonathon Luiten, Georgios Kopanas, Bastian Leibe, and
Deva Ramanan. Dynamic 3d gaussians: Tracking by per-
sistent dynamic view synthesis. In 3DV, 2024. 2, 3, 5
[48] Yifang Men, Biwen Lei, Yuan Yao, Miaomiao Cui, Zhouhui
Lian, and Xuansong Xie. En3d: An enhanced generative
model for sculpting 3d humans from 2d synthetic data. In
CVPR, 2024. 2, 6
[49] Yifang Men, Yuan Yao, Miaomiao Cui, and Liefeng Bo.
Mimo: Controllable character video synthesis with spatial
decomposed modeling.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.16160,
2024. 3
[50] Panwang Pan, Zhuo Su, Chenguo Lin, Zhen Fan, Yongjie
Zhang, Zeming Li, Tingting Shen, Yadong Mu, and Yebin
Liu.
Humansplat:
Generalizable single-image human
gaussian splatting with structure priors.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2406.12459, 2024. 2
[51] Georgios Pavlakos, Vasileios Choutas, Nima Ghorbani,
Timo Bolkart, Ahmed AA Osman, Dimitrios Tzionas, and
Michael J Black. Expressive body capture: 3d hands, face,
and body from a single image. In CVPR, 2019. 3, 12
[52] William Peebles and Saining Xie. Scalable diffusion models
with transformers. arXiv preprint arXiv:2212.09748, 2022.
3
[53] Hao-Yang Peng, Jia-Peng Zhang, Meng-Hao Guo, Yan-Pei
Cao, and Shi-Min Hu. Charactergen: Efficient 3d character
generation from single images with multi-view pose canoni-
calization. TOG, 2024. 2, 3, 6, 7
[54] Sida Peng, Junting Dong, Qianqian Wang, Shangzhan
Zhang, Qing Shuai, Xiaowei Zhou, and Hujun Bao. Ani-
matable neural radiance fields for modeling dynamic human
bodies. In ICCV, 2021. 3
[55] Gerard Pons-Moll, Sergi Pujades, Sonny Hu, and Michael J.
Black. Clothcap. TOG, 2017. 2
[56] Ben Poole, Ajay Jain, Jonathan T Barron, and Ben Milden-
hall. Dreamfusion: Text-to-3d using 2d diffusion. In ICLR,
2023. 3
[57] Albert Pumarola, Enric Corona, Gerard Pons-Moll, and
Francesc Moreno-Noguer. D-nerf: Neural radiance fields for
dynamic scenes. arXiv preprint arXiv:2011.13961, 2020. 5
[58] Lingteng Qiu and Guanying Chen. Rec-mv: Reconstructing
3d dynamic cloth from monocular videos. In CVPR, 2023.
3, 6
[59] Nikhila Ravi, Valentin Gabeur, Yuan-Ting Hu, Ronghang
Hu, Chaitanya Ryali, Tengyu Ma, Haitham Khedr, Roman
R¨adle, Chloe Rolland, Laura Gustafson, Eric Mintun, Junt-
ing Pan, Kalyan Vasudev Alwala, Nicolas Carion, Chao-
Yuan Wu, Ross Girshick, Piotr Doll´ar, and Christoph Feicht-
enhofer. Sam 2: Segment anything in images and videos.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.00714, 2024. 5
[60] Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz,
Patrick Esser, and Bj¨orn Ommer. High-resolution image syn-
thesis with latent diffusion models. In CVPR, 2022. 3
[61] Shunsuke Saito, Zeng Huang, Ryota Natsume, Shigeo Mor-
ishima, Angjoo Kanazawa, and Hao Li. Pifu: Pixel-aligned
10
