Title: Rec-mv: Reconstructing 3d dynamic cloth from monocular videos

REC-MV: REconstructing 3D Dynamic Cloth from Monocular Videos
Lingteng Qiu1*
Guanying Chen1,2*
Jiapeng Zhou1
Mutian Xu1
Junle Wang3
Xiaoguang Han1,2†
1SSE, CUHKSZ
2FNii, CUHKSZ
3Tencent
Abstract
Reconstructing dynamic 3D garment surfaces with open
boundaries from monocular videos is an important problem
as it provides a practical and low-cost solution for clothes
digitization.
Recent neural rendering methods achieve
high-quality dynamic clothed human reconstruction results
from monocular video, but these methods cannot separate
the garment surface from the body. Moreover, despite ex-
isting garment reconstruction methods based on feature
curve representation demonstrating impressive results for
garment reconstruction from a single image, they struggle
to generate temporally consistent surfaces for the video in-
put. To address the above limitations, in this paper, we for-
mulate this task as an optimization problem of 3D garment
feature curves and surface reconstruction from monocular
video. We introduce a novel approach, called REC-MV, to
jointly optimize the explicit feature curves and the implicit
signed distance field (SDF) of the garments. Then the open
garment meshes can be extracted via garment template reg-
istration in the canonical space. Experiments on multiple
casually captured datasets show that our approach outper-
forms existing methods and can produce high-quality dy-
namic garment surfaces. The source code is available at
https://github.com/GAP-LAB-CUHK-SZ/REC-MV.
1. Introduction
High-fidelity clothes digitization plays an essential role
in various human-related vision applications such as vir-
tual shopping, film, and gaming.
In our daily life, hu-
mans are always in a moving status, driving their clothes
to move together. To realize this very common scenario, it
is indispensable to gain dynamic garments in real applica-
tions. Thanks to the rapid development of mobile devices
in terms of digital cameras, processors, and storage, shoot-
ing a monocular video in the wild becomes highly conve-
nient and accessible for general customers. In this paper,
* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author: hanxiaoguang@cuhk.edu.cn.
Figure 1. Can we extract dynamic 3D garments from monocu-
lar videos? The answer is Yes! By jointly optimizing the dynamic
feature curves and garment surface followed by non-rigid template
registration, our method can reconstruct high-fidelity and tempo-
rally consistent garment meshes with open boundaries.
our goal is definite – extracting dynamic 3D garments from
monocular videos, which is significantly meaningful and
valuable for practical applications, but is yet an uncultivated
land with many challenges.
We attempt to seek a new solution to this open prob-
lem and start by revisiting existing works from two main-
streams.
i) Leveraging the success of neural rendering
methods [35, 37, 57], several works are able to recon-
struct dynamic clothed humans from monocular videos
[8, 19, 29, 47, 49], by representing the body surface with
an implicit function in the canonical space and apply skin-
ning based deformation for motion modeling. One naive
way to achieve our goal is: first to get the clothed human
through these methods and separate the garments from hu-
man bodies. However, such a separation job requires la-
borious and non-trivial processing by professional artists,
which is neither straightforward nor feasible for general
application scenarios.
ii) As for garment reconstruction,
many methods [5, 10, 20, 61, 62] make it possible to recon-
struct high-quality garment meshes from single-view im-
ages in the wild. Specifically, ReEF [62] estimates 3D fea-
arXiv:2305.14236v2  [cs.CV]  27 May 2023


ture curves* and an implicit surface field [34] for non-rigid
garment template registration.
Nonetheless, these meth-
ods struggle to produce temporally consistent surfaces when
taking videos as inputs.
The above discussion motivates us to combine the mer-
its of both the dynamic surface modeling in recent neu-
ral rendering methods and the explicit curve representation
for garment modeling.
To this end, we try to delineate
a new path towards our goal: optimizing dynamic explicit
feature curves and implicit garment surface from monocu-
lar videos, to extract temporally consistent garment meshes
with open boundaries. We represent the explicit curves and
implicit surface in the canonical space with skinning-based
motion modeling, and optimize them by 2D supervision au-
tomatically extracted from the video (e.g., image intensities,
garment masks, and visible feature curves). After that, the
open garment meshes can be extracted by a garment tem-
plate registration in the canonical space (see Fig. 1).
We strive to probe this path as follows: (1) As a feature
curve is a point set whose deformation has a high degree
of freedom, directly optimizing the per-point offsets often
leads to undesired self-intersection and spike artifacts. To
better regularize the deformation of curves, we introduce
an intersection-free curve deformation method to maintain
the order of feature curves. (2) We optimize the 3D fea-
ture curves using 2D projection loss measured by the esti-
mated 2D visible curves, where the key challenge is to ac-
curately compute the visibility of curves. To address this
problem, we propose a surface-aware curve visibility esti-
mation method based on the implicit garment surface and
z-buffer. (3) To ensure the accuracy of curve visibility es-
timation during the optimization process, the curves should
always be right on the garment surface. We therefore in-
troduce a progressive curve and surface evolution strategy
to jointly update the curves and surface while imposing the
on-surface regularization for curves.
To summarize, the main contributions of this work are:
• We introduce REC-MV, to our best knowledge, the
first method to reconstruct dynamic and open loose
garments from the monocular video.
• We propose a new approach for joint optimization
of explicit feature curves and implicit garment sur-
face from monocular video, based on carefully de-
signed intersection-free curve deformation, surface-
aware curve visibility estimation, and progressive
curve and surface evolution methods.
• Extensive evaluations on casually captured monocular
videos demonstrate that our method outperforms exist-
ing methods.
* feature curves of the garment (e.g., necklines, hemlines) can provide criti-
cal cues for determining the shape contours of the garment.
2. Related Work
Human Reconstruction from Single-view Image. Tradi-
tional methods for human reconstruction often adopt a para-
metric human model (e.g., SMPL [32] or SCAPE [4]) and
can only recover a naked 3D body [23,24]. To increase the
surface details, free-form deformations can be applied to the
mesh vertices to model small geometry variations caused by
the clothing [2,3,26,43,52].
Recent methods propose to utilize implicit surface repre-
sentations [34,38] to reconstruct 3D clothed human with an
arbitrary topology. Specifically, PIFu and PIFuhd [44, 45]
extract pixel-aligned spatial features from images as the in-
put for implicit surface function for occupancy prediction.
Follow-up methods then integrates 3D-aligned features to
improve the results [6, 15–18, 56, 58]. As these methods
only consider single-image reconstruction, they cannot pro-
duce temporally consistent results for video input.
Human Reconstruction from Monocular Video. Inspired
by the success of neural rendering methods [35, 37, 57] in
scene reconstruction, many methods have been proposed to
reconstruct 3D human from sparse-view [31,41,53,55,60]
or monocular [19,47,49] videos.
Anim-NeRF [8], Neuman [21] and HumanNeRF [49] in-
troduce methods based on neural radiance field (NeRF) [35]
to reconstruct an animatable avatar from monocular video.
These methods transform a 3D point in the observation
space to the canonical space by inverse-skinning, and then
perform volume rendering in the canonical space.
A-
NeRF [47] additionally adopt a skeleton-relative encod-
ing strategy. AvatarCap [29] proposes a monocular human
volumetric capture method, but requires reconstructing an
avatar from multiple 3D scans in advance.
Garment Reconstruction from Images. Reconstructing
garment mesh from images enables many applications like
virtual try-on and content creation. Existing methods re-
construct the clothing as a separate layer on top of the
body [7, 22, 25, 42, 48, 51]. Among them, several meth-
ods address the challenging problem of garment recon-
struction from single-view image [5, 10, 20, 36, 61, 62].
MGN [5] learns a per-category parametric model from a
large-scale clothing dataset. BCNet [20] first reconstructs
a coarse template and then refines the surface details with
a displacement network. AnchorUDF [59] adopts the un-
signed distance field (UDF) [9] to represent the open sur-
face mesh. SMPlicit [10] proposes a generative model to
reconstruct layered garments from a single image. Deep-
Fasion3D [61] reconstructs the surface with occupancy net-
work [34] and applys non-rigid ICP to register the clothing
template. ReEF [62] registers explicit clothing template to
the implicit field learned from pixel-aligned implicit func-
tion. However, as these single-image methods do not con-
sider clothing motion, they are not suitable for dynamic gar-


i-th Frame 
Surface Template
Initial SDF
Canonical Explicit Curves 
Canonical Implicit Surface 
Input video
Video sequence with parsing maps 
Deformation
Field
Deformation
Field
Shared
Surface 
Constrain
Curve 
Constrain
Photometric
Loss
Visible Pixel-level Curves
Rendered Image
Projection 
Loss
Surface-aware Visibility
View-Posed Space
(d) Registration Results
(c) Surface Optimization
(b) Curve Optimization
Canonical Registration
i-th Reconstruction 
Handle-based
Deformation
(a) Initialization
i-th Visible 2D Curve
Deform
Project
Surface 
Rendering
Figure 2. Overview of the proposed REC-MV. (a) Starting from a surface template, we initialize the canonical curves by solving Eq. (3),
and apply a handle-based deformation to initialize the canonical implicit surface. (b) Given an i-th frame, canonical curves are deformed to
the camera view space to compute the projection loss based on the surface-aware visibility estimation. (c) Similarly, the canonical surface
is deform to the camera view to compute the photometric loss by differentiable rendering. The curves and surface are jointly optimized to
enable a progressive co-evolution. (d) Last, the open garment meshes can be extracted by template registration in the canonical space.
ment reconstruction.
Among methods related to garment reconstruction from
videos, Li et al. [28] introduce a method to learn physics-
aware clothing deformation from monocular videos, but as-
sumes the template scans for the body and clothing are pro-
vided [13].
Garment Avatar [14] proposes a multi-view
patterned cloth tracking algorithm, requiring the subject to
wear clothing with specific patterns.
SCARF represents
the layered clothing using radiance field [11] on top of the
SMPL-X model [40] from monocular video. In contrast,
our method first reconstructs the explicit 3D garment curves
and surfaces, and then extracts the garment mesh via tem-
plate registration.
3. Method
Given a monocular video with Ni frames depicting a
moving person {It|t = 1, . . . , Ni}, REC-MV aims to re-
construct high-fidelity and space-time coherent open gar-
ment meshes. This is a challenging problem as it requires a
method to simultaneously capture the shape contours, local
surface details, and the motion of the garment.
Observing that feature curves (e.g., necklines, hemlines)
provide critical cues for determining the shape contours of
garment [61] and implicit signed distance function (SDF)
can well represent a detailed closed surface [19], we pro-
pose to first optimize the explicit 3D feature curves and
implicit garment surfaces from the video, and then apply
non-rigid clothing template registration to extract the open
garment meshes (see Fig. 2).
Preprocessing. We generate the initial shape parameter β,
camera intrinsic π, and per-frame SMPL [32] pose param-
eters {θt|t = 1, . . . , Ni} using Videoavatar [3]. To iden-
tify the garment regions in 2D images, we apply the exist-
ing garment parsing method [27] to estimate the garment
masks. Our method also requires 2D visible curves ζ =
{ζl,t|l = 1, . . . Nl, t = 1, . . . , Ni} for 3D curve recov-
ery, where Nl denotes the number of curves. Note that the
2D visible curves can be automatically produced by parsing
boundaries of the garment mask (more details in the supple-
mentary material).
Overview. To utilize the information that exists in the en-
tire video for dynamic garment reconstruction, we repre-
sent the explicit feature curve and implicit garment sur-
face in the canonical space (Sec. 3.1). For a specific time
step, we adopt the skeleton-based skinning and non-rigid
deformation modeling to map the canonical curves and sur-
faces to the camera view space (Sec. 3.2). As the given 2D
curves only contain visible points, to optimize the 3D fea-
ture curves from 2D projection error, we propose a surface-
aware approach to compute the visibility of the 3D feature
curve based on z-buffer (Sec. 3.3). In terms of implicit sur-
face optimization, we minimize the photometric loss be-
tween the rendered and input image based on the differ-
entiable surface rendering technique (Sec. 3.4). Then the
adopted loss functions for joint optimization of curves and
surfaces are described (Sec. 3.5). Last, the open garment
meshes can be extracted by registering an explicit garment
template to the recovered curves and implicit surfaces in
the canonical space (more details in the supplementary ma-
terial). Then the garment meshes can be deformed based on
the SMPL poses.


3.1. Feature Curve and Surface Representation
Explicit
Surface
Template.
Following
DeepFash-
ion3D [61], we employ several surface templates, each con-
tains a pre-defined set of 3D feature curves L = {Li|i =
1, . . . , Nl} extracted from the garment boundaries, where
Nl is the number of feature curves (see our supplementary
materials for more details). The surface templates will be
used for garment surface initialization and the pre-defined
feature curves will be used for curve initialization†.
Intersection-free Curve Deformation. A straightforward
idea is to represent a feature curve as a discrete point set,
and directly estimate the 3D deformation offset for each
point during optimization. However, this unstructured curve
representation struggles to maintain the order of the points
and often generate spike artifacts due to the high degree of
freedom of the deformation.
To address this issue, we introduce a novel intersection-
free curve deformation method, in which the point’s defor-
mation at each step is controlled by the curve center and two
orthogonal directions (see Fig. 3 for illustration). Formally,
given a curve C of Np points with center pc, the updated po-
sition of i-th point C(i) is defined as
C′(i) = pc + Sd
i nd
i + Sc
i nc,
(1)
where nd
i is the direction from the curve center to the cur-
rent point C(i), and nc =
1
Np−1
PNp
i=1(nd
i × nd
i−1) is the
direction perpendicular to the current feature curve plane.
Sd
i ∈R and Sc
i ∈R are learnable parameters specifying
the step size of the deformation.
The proposed intersection-free curve deformation can
well preserve the order of points in the curve, which largely
reduced the difficulty of optimization compared to the direct
offset estimation approach.
Implicit SDF in Canonical Space.
Unsigned distance
field (UDF) [9] is an implicit function that can represent
an open surface. However, as UDF is not differentiable at
points close to the surface, it is non-trivial to integrate UDF
with differentiable surface rendering to take advantage of
supervision from 2D photometric loss. We therefore adopt
the SDF to represent a closed garment surface for surface
geometry recovery, followed by garment template registra-
tion to extract the open surface.
It is common to represent the whole surface with a single
SDF for human reconstruction [19]. However, as our goal is
to reconstruct separate clothes, using a single SDF to repre-
sent both the upper clothes and bottom clothes (e.g., skirt)
increases the difficulty of template registration (i.e., split-
ting the upper and bottom clothes requires highly accurate
waist curves).
† including templates for uppers, dresses, coats, pants, and skirts.
𝑝i−1
𝑝i
𝑝c
𝑛i
𝑑
𝑛𝑐
𝑆𝑖
𝑑
𝐶′ 𝑖
𝑆𝑖
𝑐
𝑛i−1
𝑑
Figure 3. Illustration of the intersection-free curve deformation.
To enable better template registration, we consider
three different surface types (i.e., upper-clothing, bottom-
clothing, and upper-bottom) according to the garment types,
and represent each surface type as the zero-isosurface of an
independent SDF in the canonical space. The SDF is ex-
pressed by an MLP f with learnable weights η:
S(η) = {p ∈R3|f(p; η) = 0}.
For the sake of simplicity and without loss of generality,
we illustrate our method in reconstructing a single surface
type later in this section.
3.2. Skinning Based Motion Modeling
We model large body motions by linear blend skinning
(LBS) transformation based on the SMPL [32] model, and
utilize a non-rigid deformation field to account for fine-
grained deformations.
Skinning Transformation.
Given a SMPL body with
shape parameter β and a pose parameter θi in i-th frame,
a point p on the body surface in canonical space with skin-
ning weights w(p) can be warped to camera view space via
skinning transformation W.
Notably, the skinning weights w(p) are only defined for
points on the SMPL surface. To warp arbitrary points in
the canonical space to camera view, we use the diffused
skinning strategy [30] to propagate the skinning weights of
SMPL body vertices to the entire canonical space, and store
the weights in a voxel grid of size 256×256×256. Then we
can obtain the skinning weights by trilinear interpolation.
Non-rigid Deformation. Skinning deformation enables the
garment surface to deform in a way consistent with the
body’s large-scale motion [16]. However, the motion of
details and garment parts that are far away from body can-
not be fully represented by skinning transformation [19].
Hence, a non-rigid deformation MLP is used to model these
fine-grained changes. Specifically, we design an MLP D
with learnable parameters ϕ to model garment surface’s
non-rigid deformation:
p′ = D(p, h, E(p); ϕ),
(2)
where p′ is the deformed point of the input point p in the
canonical space, h is the latent code of the current frame,


and E(p) of p is the position encoding [35] to represent the
high-frequency information of spatial points.
Finally, combining D with skinning transformation field
W, we could define a deformation field Φ(·) = W(D(·)) to
warp any points in the canonical space to the camera view.
3.3. 3D Feature Curves from 2D Projections
The 3D feature curve will be optimized by minimizing
the distance between its 2D projection on the image plane
and the provided 2D visible curves. The key challenge here
is how to compute the visibility of the 3D curves in the cam-
era view. We first introduce a curve initialization strategy
based on rigid transformation, and then propose a surface-
aware curve visibility estimation method to support accu-
rate non-rigid curves optimization.
Feature Curve Initialization. We start from the predefined
feature curve sets L = {Li|i = 1, . . . , Nl} provided in the
garment template. To reduce the difficulty of curve opti-
mization, we perform a rigid curve initialization by directly
minimizing the Chamfer Distance (CD) between the pro-
jected curves on the camera view space and the correspond-
ing visible 2D curves ζ as
s, t, R = arg min
s,t,R
CD
 Π
 W(¯Li)

, ζi

,
(3)
¯Li = sR(Li) + t,
(4)
where Π is the projection matrix, ¯Li is the transformed fea-
ture curve. t ∈R3, R ∈SO(3), and s ∈R are the opti-
mized translation, rotation, and scaling parameters, respec-
tively.
In our implementation, we execute 150 gradient descent
iterations to solve the rigid transformation parameters. Af-
ter rigid optimization, we set ¯L as the initial position for
the feature curve sets {Ci|i = 1, . . . , Nl} for later non-rigid
optimization.
Surface-aware Curve Visibility Estimation. As the 2D
feature curve ζ only contains visible points, it is essential
to identify the visible points of the 3D curve C in camera
space. A naive solution is to consider a point C(i) as visi-
ble if the cosine similarity between the view direction v and
nd
i (i.e., the direction from curve center to the i-th point) in
view-pose is less than 0. However, this approach will pro-
duce wrong judgments when a curve is occluded by other
body parts.
To tackle this problem, a surface-aware curve visibility
estimation method is proposed. Specifically, we generate
an explicit mesh Ts from implicit surface S(η) in canoni-
cal space via marching cube [33]. Next, we deform Ts to
camera view space via the deformation field Φ(Ts). Then,
we can check if a feature curve point Φ(C(i)) is occluded
by the explicit mesh in view space based on z-buffer:
VC(i) = zbuffer test(Φ(C(i)), Φ(Ts)).
(5)
However, we find that the 3D curve C might sometimes
move outside or have a scale larger than the explicit mesh
Ts, there will be some errors if only depending on the z-
buffer testing between C(i) and Ts. We therefore make use
of the SMPL surface to improve the visibility estimation, by
checking if the nearest point of C(i) on the SMPL body is
occluded in the camera view space in a similar way. Note
that this is feasible as in our intersection-free curve defor-
mation, the correspondences between C(i) and its nearest
vertice in the SMPL body are almost unchanged during op-
timization. Then a curve point is considered as visible if it
passes both visibility checks.
3.4. Progressive Curve and Surface Co-evolution.
The surface of the garment is represented by the implicit
SDF. As the feature curve visibility estimation depends on
the garment surface, the curves and surface have to evolve
consistently. To ensure the accuracy of curve visibility dur-
ing the optimization process, we jointly optimize the curves
and surface while imposing a regularization that the curves
lie on the zero-isosurface of the SDF. The implicit surface is
minimized by the photometric loss based on differentiable
surface rendering.
Curve-aware Surface Initialization. A good initialization
for the implicit SDF S(η) can reduce the optimization diffi-
culty and improve the performance, especially for the long
skirt and dress. Thanks to our curve-aware garment rep-
resentation, we can utilize the initialized feature curve ¯L
computed in Eq. (4) to enable a better shape initialization.
Specifically, we apply a handle-based deformation [46] to
deform a surface template such that its feature curves are
aligned with ¯L. Then, we apply IGR [12] to initialize the
implicit surface S(η) by fitting the deformed template.
Differentiable Surface Rendering. To reconstruct high-
fidelity geometry, following the SelfRecon [19], we find the
intersection points p on the surface and make them differ-
entiable (more details can be found in supplementary).
After obtaining the intersection points p, we compute its
gradient np = ∇f(p; η) and transform the camera view
to canonical space as vp by the Jacobian matrix of the de-
formed point Φ(p) (more details can be found in supple-
mentary). To better account for the changes in the illumina-
tion, we also take a per-frame latent code z as input to the
color rendering network fc. Then, the surface color Cp of
point p can be computed as
Cp = fc(p, np, vp, z, E(p); ψ).
(6)
3.5. Loss Function
The overall loss function consists of two parts, one part
is for the feature curves optimization and the other is for
garment surfaces optimization.


3.5.1
Explicit Feature Curve Loss
The optimization of feature curves relies on the 2D pro-
jection loss, a curve slope regularization loss, and an on-
surface regularization loss that ensures the feature curves
are on the garment surface.
Feature Curve Projection Loss. Given SMPL pose pa-
rameter θi and the camera projection matrix Π, we warp
predicted feature curve C to camera view space via defor-
mation field Φ, and compute project loss Lproj measured
by 2D visible curves ζ using Chamfer Distance (CD):
Lproj = CD(VC ⊗Π(Φ(C)), ζ)
(7)
where VC is the visibility mask of curves, and symbol ⊗
indicates the mask selection operator.
Feature Curve Slope Regularization. To maintain the cur-
vature of 3D curve C, we design a slope loss Lslop to regu-
larize that the slope is consistent between adjacent points
Lslop =
Np
X
i=1
(1 −cos < si+1, si >)
(8)
where si = C(i + 1) −C(i), Np is the point number in the
curve, and cos <> is the cosine similarity function.
On-surface Regularization. In addition, the feature curves
are required to be on the corresponding garment surface.
Hence, we introduce an as near as possible loss Lanap as:
Lanap =
Np
X
i=1
|f(C(i); η)|
(9)
The overall explicit feature curve loss can be written as:
Lcurve = λprojLproj + λslopLslop + λanapLanap
(10)
where λproj, λslop and λanap are loss weights.
3.5.2
Garment Surface Loss
For a monocular video with Ni frames, the learnable pa-
rameter in implicit surface reconstruction is denoted as Θ:
Θ = {η, ϕ, ψ} ∪{hi, zi|i = 1, . . . , Ni}
(11)
Surface Rendering Loss. For a pixel within the garment
mask, we compute the ray’s intersection point p on the
canonical surface S(η) and apply surface rendering network
to predict the color Cp (see Eq. (6)). Then the photometric
loss can be computed as
LRGB =
1
|R|
X
p∈R
|Cp(Θ) −Ip|,
(12)
where R is the sample point set, Ip is the corresponding
ground-truth pixel color from the input images.
Mask-guided Implicit Consistency Loss. To better opti-
mize implicit surface, following SelfRecon [19], we period-
ically extract explicit surface meshes Ts in canonical space
from SDF f and use a differentiable renderer [50] to itera-
tively optimize Ts by a mask loss using the surface mask.
Then the updated explicit surface ˆTs will be used to super-
vise the implicit SDF f as
Lmcons =
1
|ˆTs|
X
p∈ˆTs
|f(p; η)|.
(13)
Curve-guided Implicit Consistency Loss. We find that the
explicit mesh ˆTs updated by the mask loss might contain
holes or even collapse in some surface areas, which will
harm the learning of implicit surface (see in Fig. 9). To
address this issue, we design an explicit curve and surface
consistency loss. Specifically, for a specific feature curve C
that belongs to two implicit surfaces (e.g., waist curve be-
longs to both the upper-clothing and bottom-clothing), we
generate its closed surface TC and then sample Na points
from TC to constrain the implicit SDF f as
Lccons =
1
|TC|
X
p∈TC
|f(p; η)|.
(14)
Common Implicit Loss.
Eikonal loss Leik [12] is in-
cluded to make the implicit function the signed distance
function. To avoid distortion of non-rigid transformation,
a rigid loss [39] Larap is computed to constrain the non-
rigid deformation. We also compute normal loss Lnorm in
canonical space to further refine the surface [19]. Moreover,
we compute the skeleton smoothness loss [54] to reduce the
high-frequency jitter of SMPL poses among frames (more
details can be found in supplementary).
The overall implicit surface loss can be written as:
Lims = LRGB + λmconsLmcons + λcconsLccons
λarapLarap + λeikLeik + λnormLnorm,
(15)
where λarap, λmcons, λccons, λeik, and λnorm are the loss
weights.
4. Experiments
Since there is no existing method for open garment
meshes reconstruction from monocular videos, we compare
with three state-of-the-art single-image methods, namely
BCNet [20], ClothWild [36], and ReEF [62].
4.1. Evaluation on Synthetic Dataset
Since there is no public real dataset for evaluating dy-
namic garment reconstruction, we adopt four video se-
quences from the synthetic data generated by SelfRe-
con [19] for quantitative evaluation.


Figure 4. Qualitative comparison on the synthetic dataset. From left to right in each example: the ground-truth mesh, results of BCNet [20],
ClothedWild [36], ReEF [62], and Ours.
Input
BCNet
ClothWild
ReEF
Input
BCNet
ClothWild
ReEF
Ours
Ours
Figure 5. Qualitative comparison on real datasets between BCNet [20], ClothWild [36], ReEF [62], and our method. Upper clothes are
visualized in red color, while bottom clothes and dresses are visualized in blue color. Note that BCNet and ClothWild cannot model dresses.
We first employ Blender [1] to extract the ground-truth
garment mesh from the provided clothed human mesh of the
first frame. To measure the accuracy of the reconstructed
meshes, we compute the Chamfer distance (CD) between
the ground-truth and estimated meshes.
To evaluate the
temporal consistency of the reconstructed meshes for the
video sequence, we measure the consistency of correspond-
ing vertices (CCV), which is the root mean square error of
the corresponding vertices distances in adjacent frames.
We test our method and the baseline methods on these
four video sequences.
Table 1 shows that our method
achieves the best results in the metrics of CD and CCV
on all four videos, demonstrating the effectiveness of our
method in reconstructing accurate and temporally consis-
tent dynamic garment meshes. From the results of high er-
rors in the CCV, we can clearly see that single-image meth-
ods fail to maintain the consistency of the reconstruction
for the video input. Figure 4 compares the visual results, in
which our method produces detailed and accurate garments
that are mostly close to the ground-truth surfaces.
4.2. Evaluation on Real-world Videos
We then qualitatively evaluate our method on the Peo-
pleSnapshot [3] and a dataset captured by ourselves. These
testing videos include a diverse variety of garments cate-
gories, including upper-cloth, dress, coats, pants, and skirts.
Table 1. Quantitative results on four synthetic sequences. We com-
pare the Chamfer distance (CD) between the ground-truth and re-
constructed surfaces (in cm), as well as the consistency of corre-
sponding vertices (CCV) between adjacent frames.
Female1
Female3
Male1
Male2
Method
CD
CCV
CD
CCV
CD
CCV
CD
CCV
BCNet [20]
3.184
7.201
3.447
6.186
2.929
8.604
5.234
7.128
ClothedWild [36]
2.424
-
2.075
-
2.782
-
3.980
-
ReEF [62]
1.810
3.782
1.924
4.322
2.005
6.794
2.865
3.579
Ours
1.804
0.597
1.641
1.064
1.736
0.484
1.812
0.433
Figure 5 shows the visual comparisons. The results of
the baseline methods are predicted using a single image as
input. Our method can faithfully reconstruct the layouts and
surface details of the garments. In contrast, BCNet [20]
and ClothWild [36] cannot accurately predict the garment
layouts and produce over-smooth surfaces.
We also demonstrate our dynamic reconstruction results
in Fig. 6. We can see that our method can produce space-
time coherent results for different garment types (including
the challenging dresses) from monocular videos, which is
difficult to achieve with single-image methods.
4.3. Ablation Study
We next conduct ablation study for different components
of our method (more results in our supplementary material).
Curve Visibility Estimation. As shown in Fig. 7, sim-


Figure 6. Dynamic garment reconstruction results of our method. Each row shows the reconstruction of four frames in a monocular video.
(a) Curve Normal (b) w/o Implicit Surface
(c) w/o SMPL
(d) Surface-aware
Figure 7. Ablation study of curve visibility estimation method.
ply using normal direction for visibility estimation leads to
worse results, while using both the implicit SDF and SMPL
surfaces for z-buffer testing produces the best result.
Explicit Curve Losses. Figure 8 (a) shows that without
the curve slop loss Lslop, the optimized curves will contain
noise and artifacts. As shown in Fig. 8 (b), the proposed on-
surface regularization (i.e., Lanap) can well constrain the
curves to be on the surface and produce much more accurate
fitting results, demonstrating the implicit surface helps the
optimization of curves.
Curve-guided Consistency Loss.
To improve the opti-
mization of the implicit surface, we use curves to regularize
the surface. Figure 9 shows that this regularization effec-
tively improves the surface geometry, verifying that curves
benefit the optimization of surfaces.
5. Conclusion
We have presented a new framework for dynamic gar-
ment reconstruction from monocular videos, by formulating
this task as an optimization problem of dynamic 3D curves
and surface recovery, followed by garment template regis-
tration. To solve this problem, we introduce a novel ap-
proach, called REC-MV, to jointly optimize the curves and
surface from 2D supervision in a progressive co-evolution
manner. Experimental results show that our method can re-
construct high-fidelity dynamic garments meshes with open
boundaries, significantly outperforming existing methods.
Limitations. Our method can only reconstruct common
garment categories whose contours can be represented by
(a) w/o Lslop
(b) w/o Lanap
(c) Both
Figure 8. Ablation study of the explicit curve losses.
w/o Lccons
w/ Lccons
w/o Lccons
w/ Lccons
Figure 9. Results of w/o and w/ the curve-guided consistency loss.
feature curves. Additionally, our method requires the mov-
ing person to be observed from different angles.
Acknowledgement.
The work was supported in part
by
NSFC
with
Grant
No.
62293482,
the
Basic
Research Project No.HZQB-KCZYZ-2021067 of Hetao
Shenzhen-HK S&T Cooperation Zone.
It was also
partially supported by Shenzhen General Project with
No.JCYJ20220530143604010, the National Key R&D
Program of China with grant No.2018YFB1800800, by
NSFC No. 62202409, by Shenzhen Outstanding Tal-
ents Training Fund 202002, by Guangdong Research
Projects No.2017ZT07X152 and No.2019CX01X104, by
the Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Future Net-
works of Intelligence (Grant No.2022B1212010001), and
by Shenzhen Key Laboratory of Big Data and Artificial
Intelligence (Grant No.ZDSYS201707251409055). It was
also sponsored by CCF-Tencent Open Research Fund.


References
[1] Blender. https://www.blender.org/. 2021. 7
[2] Thiemo Alldieck, Marcus Magnor, Bharat Lal Bhatnagar,
Christian Theobalt, and Gerard Pons-Moll. Learning to re-
construct people in clothing from a single RGB camera. In
CVPR, 2019. 2
[3] Thiemo Alldieck, Marcus Magnor, Weipeng Xu, Christian
Theobalt, and Gerard Pons-Moll. Video based reconstruction
of 3d people models. In CVPR, 2018. 2, 3, 7
[4] Dragomir Anguelov, Praveen Srinivasan, Daphne Koller, Se-
bastian Thrun, Jim Rodgers, and James Davis.
SCAPE:
shape completion and animation of people. TOG, 2005. 2
[5] Bharat Lal Bhatnagar, Garvita Tiwari, Christian Theobalt,
and Gerard Pons-Moll. Multi-garment net: Learning to dress
3d people from images. In ICCV, 2019. 1, 2
[6] Yukang Cao, Guanying Chen, Kai Han, Wenqi Yang, and
Kwan-Yee K Wong. Jiff: Jointly-aligned implicit face func-
tion for high quality single view clothed human reconstruc-
tion. In CVPR, 2022. 2
[7] Andr´es Casado-Elvira, Marc Comino Trinidad, and Dan
Casas. Pergamo: Personalized 3d garments from monocu-
lar video. arXiv e-prints, 2022. 2
[8] Jianchuan Chen, Ying Zhang, Di Kang, Xuefei Zhe, Lin-
chao Bao, Xu Jia, and Huchuan Lu.
Animatable neural
radiance fields from monocular rgb videos. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2106.13629, 2021. 1, 2
[9] Julian Chibane, Aymen Mir, and Gerard Pons-Moll. Neural
unsigned distance fields for implicit function learning. In
NeurIPS, 2020. 2, 4
[10] Enric Corona, Albert Pumarola, Guillem Alenya, Ger-
ard Pons-Moll, and Francesc Moreno-Noguer.
Smplicit:
Topology-aware generative model for clothed people.
In
CVPR, 2021. 1, 2
[11] Yao Feng, Jinlong Yang, Marc Pollefeys, Michael J Black,
and Timo Bolkart.
Capturing and animation of body
and clothing from monocular video.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2210.01868, 2022. 3
[12] Amos Gropp, Lior Yariv, Niv Haim, Matan Atzmon, and
Yaron Lipman. Implicit geometric regularization for learning
shapes. In Machine Learning and Systems, 2020. 5, 6
[13] Marc Habermann, Weipeng Xu, Michael Zollhofer, Gerard
Pons-Moll, and Christian Theobalt.
Deepcap: Monocu-
lar human performance capture using weak supervision. In
CVPR, 2020. 3
[14] Oshri Halimi, Fabian Prada, Tuur Stuyck, Donglai Xiang,
Timur Bagautdinov, He Wen, Ron Kimmel, Takaaki Shira-
tori, Chenglei Wu, and Yaser Sheikh. Garment avatars: Re-
alistic cloth driving using pattern registration. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2206.03373, 2022. 3
[15] Tong He, John Collomosse, Hailin Jin, and Stefano Soatto.
Geo-pifu: Geometry and pixel aligned implicit functions for
single-view human reconstruction. In NeurIPS, 2020. 2
[16] Tong He, Yuanlu Xu, Shunsuke Saito, Stefano Soatto, and
Tony Tung. Arch++: Animation-ready clothed human re-
construction revisited. In ICCV, 2021. 2, 4
[17] Yang Hong, Juyong Zhang, Boyi Jiang, Yudong Guo, Ligang
Liu, and Hujun Bao. Stereopifu: Depth aware clothed human
digitization via stereo vision. In CVPR, 2021. 2
[18] Zeng Huang, Yuanlu Xu, Christoph Lassner, Hao Li, and
Tony Tung. Arch: Animatable reconstruction of clothed hu-
mans. In CVPR, 2020. 2
[19] Boyi Jiang, Yang Hong, Hujun Bao, and Juyong Zhang. Sel-
frecon: Self reconstruction your digital avatar from monoc-
ular video. In CVPR, 2022. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6
[20] Boyi Jiang, Juyong Zhang, Yang Hong, Jinhao Luo, Ligang
Liu, and Hujun Bao. Bcnet: Learning body and cloth shape
from a single image. In ECCV, 2020. 1, 2, 6, 7
[21] Wei Jiang, Kwang Moo Yi, Golnoosh Samei, Oncel Tuzel,
and Anurag Ranjan. Neuman: Neural human radiance field
from a single video. In ECCV, 2022. 2
[22] N. Jin, Y. Zhu, Z. Geng, and R. Fedkiw.
A pixel-
based framework for data-driven clothing.
In ACM SIG-
GRAPH/Eurographics Symposium on Computer Animation,
2020. 2
[23] Hanbyul Joo, Tomas Simon, and Yaser Sheikh. Total cap-
ture: A 3d deformation model for tracking faces, hands, and
bodies. In ICCV, 2018. 2
[24] Angjoo Kanazawa, Michael J. Black, David W. Jacobs, and
Jitendra Malik. End-to-end recovery of human shape and
pose. In CVPR, 2018. 2
[25] Zorah Lahner, Daniel Cremers, and Tony Tung. Deepwrin-
kles: Accurate and realistic clothing modeling. In ECCV,
2018. 2
[26] Verica Lazova, Eldar Insafutdinov, and Gerard Pons-Moll.
360-degree textures of people in clothing from a single im-
age. In International Conference on 3D Vision (3DV), 2019.
2
[27] Peike Li, Yunqiu Xu, Yunchao Wei, and Yi Yang.
Self-
correction for human parsing. TPAMI, 2020. 3
[28] Yue Li, Marc Habermann, Bernhard Thomaszewski, Stelian
Coros, Thabo Beeler, and Christian Theobalt. Deep physics-
aware inference of cloth deformation for monocular human
performance capture. In 3DV, 2021. 3
[29] Zhe Li, Zerong Zheng, Hongwen Zhang, Chaonan Ji, and
Yebin Liu.
Avatarcap:
Animatable avatar conditioned
monocular human volumetric capture. In ECCV, 2022. 1,
2
[30] Siyou Lin, Hongwen Zhang, Zerong Zheng, Ruizhi Shao,
and Yebin Liu. Learning implicit templates for point-based
clothed human modeling. In ECCV, 2022. 4
[31] Lingjie Liu, Marc Habermann, Viktor Rudnev, Kripasindhu
Sarkar, Jiatao Gu, and Christian Theobalt.
Neural actor:
Neural free-view synthesis of human actors with pose con-
trol. TOG, 2021. 2
[32] Matthew Loper, Naureen Mahmood, Javier Romero, Gerard
Pons-Moll, and Michael J Black. Smpl: A skinned multi-
person linear model. TOG, 2015. 2, 3, 4
[33] William E Lorensen and Harvey E Cline. Marching cubes:
A high resolution 3d surface construction algorithm. SIG-
GRAPH, 1987. 5
[34] Lars Mescheder, Michael Oechsle, Michael Niemeyer, Se-
bastian Nowozin, and Andreas Geiger. Occupancy networks:


Learning 3d reconstruction in function space. In ICCV, 2019.
2
[35] Ben Mildenhall, Pratul P Srinivasan, Matthew Tancik,
Jonathan T Barron, Ravi Ramamoorthi, and Ren Ng. NeRF:
Representing scenes as neural radiance fields for view syn-
thesis. In ECCV, 2020. 1, 2, 5
[36] Gyeongsik Moon, Hyeongjin Nam, Takaaki Shiratori, and
Kyoung Mu Lee. 3d clothed human reconstruction in the
wild. In ECCV, 2022. 2, 6, 7
[37] Michael Niemeyer, Lars Mescheder, Michael Oechsle, and
Andreas Geiger. Differentiable volumetric rendering: Learn-
ing implicit 3d representations without 3d supervision. In
CVPR, 2020. 1, 2
[38] Jeong Joon Park, Peter Florence, Julian Straub, Richard
Newcombe, and Steven Lovegrove. Deepsdf: Learning con-
tinuous signed distance functions for shape representation.
In ICCV, 2019. 2
[39] Keunhong Park, Utkarsh Sinha, Jonathan T Barron, Sofien
Bouaziz, Dan B Goldman, Steven M Seitz, and Ricardo
Martin-Brualla. Nerfies: Deformable neural radiance fields.
In ICCV, 2021. 6
[40] Georgios Pavlakos, Vasileios Choutas, Nima Ghorbani,
Timo Bolkart, Ahmed AA Osman, Dimitrios Tzionas, and
Michael J Black. Expressive body capture: 3d hands, face,
and body from a single image. In CVPR, 2019. 3
[41] Sida Peng, Yuanqing Zhang, Yinghao Xu, Qianqian Wang,
Qing Shuai, Hujun Bao, and Xiaowei Zhou. Neural body:
Implicit neural representations with structured latent codes
for novel view synthesis of dynamic humans.
In CVPR,
2021. 2
[42] Gerard Pons-Moll, Sergi Pujades, Sonny Hu, and Michael
Black. ClothCap: Seamless 4D clothing capture and retar-
geting. TOG, 2017. 2
[43] Ma Qianli, Yang Jinlong, Ranjan Anurag, Pujades Sergi,
Pons-Moll Gerard, Tang Siyu, and J.Black Michael. Learn-
ing to dress 3d people in generative clothing. In CVPR, 2020.
2
[44] Shunsuke Saito, Zeng Huang, Ryota Natsume, Shigeo Mor-
ishima, Angjoo Kanazawa, and Hao Li. Pifu: Pixel-aligned
implicit function for high-resolution clothed human digitiza-
tion. In ICCV, 2019. 2
[45] Shunsuke Saito, Tomas Simon, Jason Saragih, and Hanbyul
Joo. Pifuhd: Multi-level pixel-aligned implicit function for
high-resolution 3d human digitization. In CVPR, 2020. 2
[46] Olga Sorkine, Daniel Cohen-Or, Yaron Lipman, Marc Alexa,
Christian R¨ossl, and H-P Seidel. Laplacian surface editing.
In Eurographics/ACM SIGGRAPH symposium on Geometry
processing, 2004. 5
[47] Shih-Yang Su, Frank Yu, Michael Zollh¨ofer, and Helge
Rhodin. A-nerf: Articulated neural radiance fields for learn-
ing human shape, appearance, and pose. In NeurIPS, 2021.
1, 2
[48] Garvita Tiwari, Bharat Lal Bhatnagar, Tony Tung, and Ger-
ard Pons-Moll. Sizer: A dataset and model for parsing 3d
clothing and learning size sensitive 3d clothing. In ECCV,
2020. 2
[49] Chung-Yi Weng,
Brian Curless,
Pratul P Srinivasan,
Jonathan T Barron, and Ira Kemelmacher-Shlizerman. Hu-
mannerf: Free-viewpoint rendering of moving people from
monocular video. In CVPR, 2022. 1, 2
[50] Olivia Wiles, Georgia Gkioxari, Richard Szeliski, and Justin
Johnson. Synsin: End-to-end view synthesis from a single
image. In CVPR, 2020. 6
[51] Donglai Xiang, Timur Bagautdinov, Tuur Stuyck, Fabian
Prada, Javier Romero, Weipeng Xu, Shunsuke Saito, Jing-
fan Guo, Breannan Smith, Takaaki Shiratori, et al. Dressing
avatars: Deep photorealistic appearance for physically simu-
lated clothing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.15470, 2022. 2
[52] Donglai Xiang, Fabian Prada, Chenglei Wu, and Jessica K.
Hodgins.
Monoclothcap:
Towards temporally coherent
clothing capture from monocular RGB video. In 3DV, 2020.
2
[53] Hongyi Xu, Thiemo Alldieck, and Cristian Sminchisescu.
H-nerf: Neural radiance fields for rendering and temporal
reconstruction of humans in motion. In NeurIPS, 2021. 2
[54] Weipeng Xu, Avishek Chatterjee, Michael Zollh¨ofer, Helge
Rhodin, Dushyant Mehta, Hans-Peter Seidel, and Christian
Theobalt. Monoperfcap: Human performance capture from
monocular video. TOG, 2018. 6
[55] Gengshan Yang, Minh Vo, Natalia Neverova, Deva Ra-
manan, Andrea Vedaldi, and Hanbyul Joo. Banmo: Building
animatable 3d neural models from many casual videos. In
CVPR, 2022. 2
[56] Ze Yang, Shenlong Wang, Sivabalan Manivasagam, Zeng
Huang, Wei-Chiu Ma, Xinchen Yan, Ersin Yumer, and
Raquel Urtasun. S3: Neural shape, skeleton, and skinning
fields for 3d human modeling. In CVPR, 2021. 2
[57] Lior Yariv, Yoni Kasten, Dror Moran, Meirav Galun, Matan
Atzmon, Basri Ronen, and Yaron Lipman. Multiview neu-
ral surface reconstruction by disentangling geometry and ap-
pearance. In NeurIPS, 2020. 1, 2
[58] Zheng Zerong, Yu Tao, Liu Yebin, and Dai Qionghai.
Pamir: Parametric model-conditioned implicit representa-
tion for image-based human reconstruction. TPAMI, 2021.
2
[59] Fang Zhao, Wenhao Wang, Shengcai Liao, and Ling Shao.
Learning anchored unsigned distance functions with gradient
direction alignment for single-view garment reconstruction.
In ICCV, 2021. 2
[60] Fuqiang Zhao, Wei Yang, Jiakai Zhang, Pei Lin, Yingliang
Zhang, Jingyi Yu, and Lan Xu. Humannerf: Efficiently gen-
erated human radiance field from sparse inputs. In CVPR,
2021. 2
[61] Heming Zhu, Yu Cao, Hang Jin, Weikai Chen, Dong Du,
Zhangye Wang, Shuguang Cui, and Xiaoguang Han. Deep
fashion3d: A dataset and benchmark for 3d garment recon-
struction from single images. In ECCV, 2020. 1, 2, 3, 4
[62] Heming Zhu, Lingteng Qiu, Yuda Qiu, and Xiaoguang Han.
Registering explicit to implicit: Towards high-fidelity gar-
ment mesh reconstruction from single images.
In CVPR,
2022. 1, 2, 6, 7
