Title: Neural haircut: Prior-guided strand-based hair reconstruction

Neural Haircut: Prior-Guided Strand-Based Hair Reconstruction
Vanessa Sklyarova1
Jenya Chelishev2,∗
Andreea Dogaru3,∗
Igor Medvedev1
Victor Lempitsky4
Egor Zakharov1
1Samsung AI Center
2Rockstar Games
3FAU Erlangen-N¨urnberg
4Cinemersive Labs
Multi-view images
Stage I: Volumetric hair
Stage II: Strand-based
reconstruction
reconstruction
Figure 1: We propose a two-stage pipeline for image-based hair reconstruction. Our first stage reconstructs coarse hair, head,
and shoulder geometry using volumetric representations. The second stage fits hair strands to the coarse reconstruction via a
joint optimization process that incorporates rendering-based losses and priors learned on the synthetic data.
Abstract
Generating realistic human 3D reconstructions using
image or video data is essential for various communica-
tion and entertainment applications. While existing meth-
ods achieved impressive results for body and facial regions,
realistic hair modeling still remains challenging due to its
high mechanical complexity. This work proposes an ap-
proach capable of accurate hair geometry reconstruction at
a strand level from a monocular video or multi-view images
captured in uncontrolled lighting conditions. Our method
has two stages, with the first stage performing joint recon-
struction of coarse hair and bust shapes and hair orien-
tation using implicit volumetric representations. The sec-
ond stage then estimates a strand-level hair reconstruction
by reconciling in a single optimization process the coarse
volumetric constraints with hair strand and hairstyle pri-
ors learned from the synthetic data. To further increase the
reconstruction fidelity, we incorporate image-based losses
into the fitting process using a new differentiable renderer.
The combined system, named Neural Haircut, achieves high
realism and personalization of the reconstructed hairstyles.
For video results, please refer to our project page†.
∗Work done at Samsung AI Center
† https://samsunglabs.github.io/NeuralHaircut/
1. Introduction
We propose a new image-based modeling method that
recovers human hair from multi-view photographs or video
frames. Hair reconstruction remains one of the most chal-
lenging problems in human 3D modeling because of its
highly complex geometry, physics, and reflectance. Nev-
ertheless, it is critical for many applications, such as special
effects, telepresence, and gaming.
In computer graphics, the dominant representation for
hair is 3D polylines, or strands, which can facilitate both
realistic rendering and physics simulation [9]. At the same
time, modern image- and video-based human reconstruc-
tion systems often model hairstyles using data structures
that have fewer degrees of freedom and are easier to esti-
mate, such as meshes with fixed topology [18, 27] or volu-
metric representations [4, 11, 15, 16, 17, 22, 37, 38, 43, 51,
52, 56, 66, 67, 75, 78, 79]. As a result, these methods often
obtain over-smoothed hair geometries and can only model
the “outer shell” of the hairstyle without its inner structure.
Accurate strand-based hair reconstruction can be ac-
complished via controlled lighting equipment and dense
capture setup with synchronized cameras, i.e. using light
stages [12]. Recently, impressive results were achieved [41,
45, 58, 68, 69] by relying on uniform or structured light-
ing and camera calibration to facilitate the reconstruc-
tion process.
The latest work [58] further utilized man-
1
arXiv:2306.05872v2  [cs.CV]  12 Jun 2023


ual frame-wise annotation of the hair growth directions to
achieve physically plausible reconstructions. However, de-
spite the impressive quality of the results, the sophisticated
capture setup and the manual pre-processing requirements
make such methods unsuitable for many practical applica-
tions. Some learning-based methods for hairstyle model-
ing [7, 23, 30, 59, 73, 74, 77, 80] incorporate hair priors
learned from the strand-based synthetic data to ease the ac-
quisition process. However, the accuracy of these methods
naturally depends on the size of the training dataset. Exist-
ing datasets [23, 73] typically consist of only a few hundred
samples and are inadequately small for handling the diver-
sity of human hairstyles, leading to the low fidelity of the
reconstructions.
In this work, we propose a method for hair modeling that
uses only image- or video-based data without any additional
manual annotations and works in uncontrolled lighting con-
ditions. To achieve that, we have designed a two-stage re-
construction pipeline.
The first stage, coarse volumetric
hair reconstruction, employs implicit volumetric represen-
tations and is purely data-driven. The second stage, fine
strand-based reconstruction, operates at the level of hair
strands and relies heavily on priors learned from a small-
scale synthetic dataset.
During the first stage, we reconstruct implicit surface
representations [50] for hair and bust (head and shoulders)
regions. Additionally, we learn a field of hair growth di-
rections, which we call 3D orientations, by matching them
through a differentiable projection with hair directions ob-
served in the training images or 2D orientation maps. While
this field can facilitate a more accurate hair shape fitting,
its primary use case is to constrain the optimization of hair
strands during the second stage. To calculate the hair ori-
entation maps from the input frames, we use a classic ap-
proach based on image gradients [49].
The second stage relies on pre-trained priors to ob-
tain strand-based reconstructions. We employ an improved
parametric model learned from the synthetic data using an
auto-encoder [58] to represent individual strands and com-
bine it with a new diffusion-based prior [21, 25] to model
their joint distribution, i.e. a complete hairstyle. This stage
thus reconciles the coarse hair reconstruction obtained in
the first stage with the learning-based priors through an op-
timization process. Lastly, we improve the fidelity of recon-
structed hairstyles via differentiable rendering using a new
hair renderer based on soft rasterization [36].
To summarize, our contributions are:
• Human head 3D reconstruction method for bust and hair
regions, which includes hair orientations;
• Improved training procedure for the strand prior;
• Latent diffusion-based prior for global hairstyle model-
ing, which “interfaces” with the parametric strand prior;
• Differentiable soft hair rasterization technique that leads
to more accurate reconstructions than the previous ren-
dering methods;
• Strand-fitting process that incorporates all the compo-
nents discussed above to produce high-quality recon-
structions of human hair at the level of strands.
We validate the efficacy of our method on synthetic [76]
and real-world data, for which we use multi-view images
from a 3D scanner operating in unconstrained lighting con-
ditions [56] and monocular videos from a smartphone.
2. Related work
Human head reconstruction. Modern approaches have
achieved impressive results in modeling static and dynamic
human subjects using image and video data. These meth-
ods primarily rely on shape priors trained using synthetic
datasets or 3D scans. Among the most widespread priors
are parametric models [32, 39, 47, 48, 53] that represent
the head as a rigged mesh with a fixed topology. However,
these models do not include hair, as it is known to be no-
toriously difficult to scan. This sparked the development
of methods that extend parametric models to include hair
using volumetric representations and image or video-based
finetuning [16, 18, 27, 67, 78, 79] or, more recently, using
higher quality 3D scanners [17, 56]. While successfully re-
constructing the facial geometry, these methods still achieve
low fidelity of hair. They also model only the visible outer
hair surface and do not reconstruct the inner geometry, lim-
iting the downstream applications.
Hair reconstruction using volumetric representations still
has important advantages. Modern volumetric reconstruc-
tion methods can handle challenging lighting conditions
due to view-dependent modeling of radiance [44]. They can
also hallucinate the geometry of the outer surface regions
unseen in the training samples [19, 66, 75], which is useful
for reconstruction using video data. We found volumetric
reconstruction methods ideal for use in the first stage, dur-
ing coarse hair modeling. We further extend them to repre-
sent hair and bust geometries separately, which is not done
in the previous works. That allows us to incorporate ad-
ditional supervision for the geometry and more effectively
constrain hair strand optimization during the second stage.
In addition, the separate bust geometry is used in an aux-
iliary way to introduce proper occlusion handling into the
volumetric and strand-based hair rendering.
Strand-based hair reconstruction. Starting with the
seminal work [49] on hair reconstruction, image-based
methods [23, 30, 45, 58, 59, 73, 74, 80] have relied on
hair orientation maps [49], or gradients in the image space,
to estimate 3D hair strands. These orientation maps can
quite effectively bridge the sim-to-real gap and allow some
of these methods [30, 59, 80] to train using only synthetic
data, while still generalizing to the real-world images. How-
ever, they have multiple practical issues. In order to obtain
2


high-quality orientation maps, hair must be uniformly lit
and have no specular highlights. This assumption is quite
strong and allows impressive results [45, 58] to be achieved
using light stages for data capture. However, it limits the
practicality of such methods for real-world reconstruction
cases where lighting conditions are hard to control. Non-
uniform lighting and low effective resolution of the real-
world data lead to orientation maps having excessive noise
levels or lacking details. Furthermore, orientation maps en-
code “sign-free” local orientations and do not capture the
hair growth direction, which adds extra ambiguity to the re-
construction process.
Some methods [23, 58] address this using manual anno-
tation of the exact growth direction, which makes the recon-
struction process labor-intensive. Others [7, 30] employed
regressors trained via manual annotation to predict the hair
growth directions. However, the solution and the dataset
presented in these works are closed-source and remain chal-
lenging and costly to reproduce. Lastly, the majority of the
strand-based reconstruction method [7, 30, 45, 59, 73, 74,
77, 80] model hair strands without explicitly attaching them
to the head scalp, which limits the realism of the result-
ing reconstructions. Our method addresses all these issues
by introducing new hairstyle priors that ensure the physical
realism of the reconstructed strands and a new coarse-to-
fine optimization pipeline that uses prior-guided optimiza-
tion and differentiable rendering to obtain personalized re-
constructions even in non-uniform lighting conditions.
3. Method
3.1. Overview
We reconstruct the strand-based hair geometry given a
single monocular video or multi-view images in the form
of polylines in 3D: S = {pl}L
l=1. Our hair reconstruction
pipeline consists of two stages. First, we obtain a coarse
volumetric hair reconstruction in the form of implicit fields.
We then reconstruct fine hair strands using optimization of
coarse geometry-based, rendering-based, and prior-based
terms. The hairstyle prior is obtained separately during pre-
training on a synthetic dataset.
Hair prior training. Following [58], we parameterize
the hairstyle using a latent geometry texture defined on the
head scalp and denoted as T. The mapping between hair
strands and their latent embeddings is provided by the hair
parametric model. It has the same architecture and training
procedure as the original approach [58], besides a modified
data term that improves the fidelity of curly hair reconstruc-
tions. We denote the decoder that produces strands given
their latent embeddings as G and an encoder as E.
We then train a latent diffusion-based prior D, defined
on the geometry texture maps T.
We use EDM [25]
formulation that outperforms previous approaches such as
DDPM [21].
We introduce multiple data augmentations
that preserve the realism of the hairstyle while training on
a small dataset of hairstyles [23] consisting only of a few
hundred samples.
Stage I: coarse volumetric reconstruction.
We ap-
proach coarse reconstruction by estimating hair and bust
geometry as signed distance functions (SDFs) fhair, fbust :
R3 →R. We train them via volumetric ray marching [66]
using a shared view-dependent color field c : R3 ×S2 →R.
We employ supervision via semantic segmentation masks to
ensure that hair and bust regions are non-overlapping. Also,
to correctly reconstruct the head scalp, which is typically
not visible on training samples, we fit a FLAME [32] head
mesh to the scene and use it as a prior for the bust SDF.
Lastly, to facilitate strand-based reconstruction, we train an
additional field of 3D hair orientations β : R3 →S2 using
the hair signed distance function and match its projections
with observed hair strand orientations.
Stage II: fine strand-based reconstruction. We recon-
struct hair strands as a geometry texture T, i.e. a dense two-
dimensional map of latent hair vectors, where the position
on the map corresponds to the position of the hair root on
the scalp. At each iteration, we sample N random embed-
dings {zi}N
i=1 from the texture T and obtain correspond-
ing strands {Si}N
i=1 using a pre-trained decoder G. These
strands are then used to evaluate geometric and rendering-
based constraints. In the geometric loss, we penalize strands
outside the hair volume and ensure that the visible part
of the surface defined by fhair is uniformly covered. We
also match the orientations bl
i of the predicted strands, de-
fined as the normalized difference between two consecutive
points, to the orientation field β. Here, bl
i = dl
i

∥dl
i∥2 and
dl
i = pl+1
i
−pl
i.
Besides the geometric constraints, we also employ
silhouette-based and neural rendering losses. The rendered
hair silhouette ˆm and RGB image ˆI are then obtained using
neural soft hair rasterization denoted as R. The renderer
employs a bust surface estimated from fbust to handle oc-
clusions. The silhouette ˆm is predicted directly from the
sampled strands, while the image render is obtained via a
neural hair rendering pipeline inspired by [58].
Lastly, prior-based regularization is applied directly to
the geometry texture T using a pre-trained diffusion model.
Specifically, we apply random noise to the geometry map
and denoise it using a diffusion model D. We then evalu-
ate the reconstruction error of the input map T and back-
propagate the gradient of this loss back into the texture.
This pipeline is inspired by the DreamFusion method [54],
albeit with some modifications which facilitate training
from a small dataset of hairstyles.
The scheme of the fine reconstruction stage is shown in
Figure 2. Below, we describe the parts of our approach in
more detail.
3


Figure 2: The overview of the second stage of our approach (fine strand-based reconstruction). We use shape texture to
represent hair strands and utilize multiple objectives to optimize it. We apply Lprior as a regularization penalty using a
diffusion network pre-trained on synthetic hairstyles. Then, we use Lgeom to match the reconstructed strands to geometry and
orientation fields parameterized by the implicit function. Lastly, Lrender is used to match the rendered hair to the ground truth
image.
3.2. Hair prior training
Our global hairstyle prior is trained using a strand para-
metric model and a latent diffusion network, which inter-
face with each other via the geometry texture T.
Hair strand parametric model. To obtain the latent
representations for the hair strands, we follow [58] and
train a variational autoencoder, which maps a strand S =
{pl}L
l=1 into a latent vector z via encoder E, and back via
decoder G. During training, we employ the reparameteriza-
tion trick: z = zµ + ϵ · zσ, where zµ and zσ are param-
eters of the Gaussian distribution, and ϵ ∼N(0, I). The
model is trained using the data term Ldata and KL diver-
gence [29] term LKL on a synthetic dataset of hair strands.
The data term consists of an L2 error between predicted ˆpl
and ground-truth points pl, as well as the cosine distance
for the orientations ˆbl and bl, similarly to [58]. Inspired
by [80], we additionally match curvatures ˆgl and gl of pre-
dicted and ground-truth strands to better model curly hair,
where
gl =
bl × bl+1
2.
(1)
Our data term is therefore defined as follows:
Ldata =
L
X
l=1
ˆpl −pl2
2 + λd
 1 −ˆblbl
+ λc
ˆgl −gl2
2,
(2)
and the final loss is:
LVAE = Ldata + λKLLKL
 N(zµ, zσ)
 N(0, I)

.
(3)
Hairstyle diffusion model. We obtain the latent repre-
sentation of the synthetic hairstyle consisting of N strands
{Si}N
i=1 by first estimating their latent descriptors {zi}N
i=1
using the pre-trained strand encoder E. We then convert
them into a dense texture T using nearest neighbor interpo-
lation. To increase the diversity of training samples, we em-
ploy augmentations that preserve the realism of the hairstyle
before encoding. Also, to speed up the training and further
diversify the inputs of the diffusion model, we subsample
the full texture into a low-resolution map TLR.
We use the Elucidating Diffusion Moldel (EDM) [25] to
train the denoiser D. Below, we denote a training sample
TLR as y to be consistent with [25], and obtain a noised
input: x = y + ϵ · σ, where ϵ ∼N(0, I), and σ is a noise
strength. We then predict a denoised input:
D(x, σ) = cskip(σ)·x+cout(σ)·F
 cin(σ)·x, cnoise(σ)

, (4)
where the cskip, cout, cin and cnoise are part of pre-
conditioning approach proposed in [25], which improves
the robustness of D to the low noise strength σ, and F is
a neural network. Our training objective also follows [25]:
Ldiff = E y,σ,ϵ
h
λdiff(σ) ·
D(x, σ) −y
2
2
i
,
(5)
where λdiff(σ) is a weighting function, and the expectation
is approximated via sampling.
3.3. Coarse volumetric reconstruction
We represent the subject’s coarse head geometry in a
segmented form using the hair and the bust neural signed
distance functions [50] (SDFs). We use the volumetric ray
marching approach for neural implicit surfaces, NeuS [66]
to fit them. We modify NeuS to accommodate multi-label
4


reconstruction as we reconstruct the hair geometry and the
bust (head and shoulders) geometry as separate shapes. The
training proceeds by approximating a pixel’s color c using
the radiance at N points xi sampled along the correspond-
ing ray v. The color is predicted as follows:
ˆc =
N
X
i=1
Ti · αi · c (xi, v, l, n),
Ti =
i−1
Y
j=1
(1 −αi),
(6)
where Ti is the accumulated transmittance, αi is the opacity,
l and n - the blended hair with bust features and normals
correspondingly, and c is the view-dependent radiance field.
We calculate the opacity αi of each point along the ray by
blending the individual opacities of hair and bust:
αi = min
 αhair
i
+ αbust
i
, 1

.
(7)
Besides the color, we also render the bust and the hair
masks:
ˆohair =
N
X
i=1
Ti · αhair
i
,
ˆobust =
N
X
i=1
Ti · αbust
i
.
(8)
Our training losses include a photometric L1 loss Lcolor,
which matches ˆc and c, a mask-based loss Lmask that applies
binary cross-entropy between the predicted masks and the
ground-truth mhair and mbust, and the regularizing Eikonal
term [19] Lreg, which is applied for both fhair and fbust.
Our additional losses include a regularization for the bust
shape. Before proceeding with the coarse reconstruction of
the subject, we fit a FLAME [32] head mesh into the scene
using optimization based on 2D facial landmarks [3]. Us-
ing this mesh, we ensure that fbust includes the head scalp
surface region by applying the regularizing constraints de-
noted as Lhead that match the SDF to the mesh. To imple-
ment this loss, we follow the previous works [1, 19, 63] on
fitting neural SDFs using mesh-based data and provide its
full description in the supplementary materials.
Lastly, we incorporate an additional field of hair growth
directions, β, into the coarse reconstruction. We train it
via a differentiable surface rendering [15] of fhair. Follow-
ing [15], we obtain the intersection point xs of the ray v
with the hair surface. We then project the 3D orientation
field β(xs) into the camera P using Plucker line coordi-
nates [72]. The projected direction L(xs, β(xs); P) is then
matched to the 2D orientation map [49], estimated from the
training images using Gabor filters. The matching loss Ldir
follows previous works [49] on strand-based reconstruction
and penalizes the minimum angular difference between the
projected and ground-truth orientations. Please refer to the
supplementary materials for more details.
Overall, the training objective for the coarse reconstruc-
tion is as follows:
Lcoarse = Lcolor + λmaskLmask + λregLreg
+ λheadLhead + λdirLdir.
(9)
3.4. Fine strand-based reconstruction
To reconstruct the hair strands, we learn a latent hair ge-
ometry texture T [58], from which a hairstyle can be de-
coded using a pre-trained network G.
However, instead
of directly optimizing this map, we parameterize it with a
UNet-like neural network using the so-called deep image
prior [65]. We found such parameterization to not require
additional smoothing [58] of the sparse gradients from the
decoded strands. Below, we denote such new parameteriza-
tion as Tθ.
The training proceeds by sampling N points on the
scalp part of the fitted FLAME mesh and decoding them
into strands {Si}N
i=1, each strand consisting of L points:
Si = {pl
i}L
l=1. We then evaluate the following objectives:
geometry-based losses Lgeom that match the strands to the
coarse geometry, photometric constraints Lrender calculated
via differentiable rendering, and finally, a diffusion-based
prior loss Lprior. Below we describe them in more detail.
Geometry-based losses. To ensure that the optimized
strands lie inside the coarse hair volume, we employ a loss
Lvol that penalizes the points on the strands that stray out-
side of it:
Lvol =
N
X
i=1
L
X
l=1
I

fhair(pl
i) > 0
 fhair(pl
i)
2,
(10)
where I denotes the indicator function.
Additionally, to make the learned strands densely cover
the visible part of the coarse hair surface, denoted as S, we
minimize the error between K random points xk sampled
on this surface and their nearest points on the strands, de-
noted as pk. This loss Lchm is exactly equal to the one-way
Chamfer distance between the visible part of the coarse hair
surface and the learned strands:
Lchm =
K
X
k=1
xk −pk
2
2,
(11)
Lastly, we calculate the distance between the hair orien-
tations and the implicit field β at all points on the strands
that are closer to the visible hair surface S than some small
threshold τ. We denote these M points as pm and their ori-
entations as bm. The resulting orientations loss Lorient can
be written as follows:
Lorient =
M
X
m=1
 1 −
bm · β(pm)
 
.
(12)
We penalize the orientations of strands near the outer hair
surface because the photometric nature of the orientation
loss Ldir makes the field β learn accurate orientations only
in this region. We describe the procedure for estimating this
surface using fhair and fbust in the supplementary materials.
5


Overall, the total geometry loss is the following:
Lgeom = Lvol + λchmLchm + λorientLorient.
(13)
Rendering-based losses. We have developed a new ap-
proach for the differential rendering of hair strands to im-
prove the visible hair geometry.
We note that the pre-
vious hair rasterization approaches [58] rely on graphics
API [71] line rasterization algorithms, e.g. Bresenham’s line
algorithm [2]. While being computationally efficient, such
methods only provide the gradients w.r.t. the first element of
the line segments z-buffer, Figure 3 (a). At the same time,
for the task of mesh inverse rendering, it was shown to be
highly beneficial [36] to propagate the gradient into multi-
ple z-buffer elements. Inspired by the success of this soft
rasterization method [36] for meshes, we adapt it for the
differentiable rendering of hair strands Figure 3 (b).
First, we convert the hair strands into the so-called hair
quads [76]. They consist of a stripe-like mesh, which fol-
lows the strand trajectory and has normals oriented toward
the camera, see close-ups in Figure 2.
The vertices of
the resulting quad mesh are fully differentiable w.r.t. the
strands, and we include the quad generation algorithm into
the supplementary materials. We then render this mesh us-
ing soft rasterization. We include the zero iso-surface of
fbust obtained using Marching Cubes [31] into the rendering
pipeline to handle hair-bust occlusions. Contrary to the pre-
vious rasterization methods, in our approach the segmenta-
tion mask for the hair is directly predicted from the hair ge-
ometry using a soft silhouette shader [24], which allows un-
constrained gradient flow into the geometry from the mask-
based objectives. To render the color, we follow [58] and
use a neural rendering approach that can handle the view-
dependent reflectance of the hair. Specifically, we train a
neural appearance texture A similarly to the geometry tex-
ture T and use it in conjunction with a rendering U-Net to
produce the renders, similarly to [58].
As a result of the hair rasterization pipeline R described
above, we obtain both the hair silhouette ˆm and the images
ˆI in a fully differentiable way:
ˆm,ˆI = Rϕ
 {Si}N
i=1, fbust, P

,
(14)
where ϕ denotes the trainable parameters of the appearance
texture and a rendering UNet, and P are the camera param-
eters. We then apply L1 losses Lmask and Lrgb to match the
predicted silhouette and the color to the ground truth m and
I. The final rendering loss is the weighted sum of these
terms:
Lrender = Lrgb + λmaskLmask.
(15)
Diffusion-based prior. To apply the pre-trained diffu-
sion prior, we use a Score Distillation Sampling (SDS) ap-
proach from the DreamFusion work [54]. In this method,
Figure 3: (a) Differentiable hair rasterization algorithm
of [58] propagates the gradient only into the first element of
z-buffer. (b) Our proposed hair rasterization based on quads
leverages soft hair rasterization [36] and passes gradients
into multiple elements of the z-buffer to achieve better re-
constructions.
the pre-trained diffusion model is used to guide the opti-
mization of a neural radiance field [44] by providing it with
the gradients in the image space. These gradients originate
from the same loss used to train a diffusion model, in our
case, Ldiff, Eq. 5. However, instead of back-propagating
this loss through the denoising neural network F, the SDS
approach assumes the gradients w.r.t. the noised input x
to be identity: ∂F/∂x = I. However, we found such a
trick to be required only for DDPM [21] training formu-
lation used in DreamFusion, while for the EDM [25] that
we use, proper back-propagation through the denoising net-
work F leads to better results. Therefore, in our case, the
prior regularization term Lprior ≡Ldiff.
To calculate this loss, we employ the same procedure as
during the training of the diffusion model. We sample ran-
dom noise ϵ and the noise level σ and apply them to the
geometry map. Then, we perform random sub-sampling to
decrease the resolution of Tθ before forwarding it through
the diffusion model. We back-propagate the loss Lprior di-
rectly into the parameters θ of the geometry texture Tθ
while keeping the weights of the denoiser frozen.
Overall, the optimization objective for the strand-based
reconstruction stage is the following:
Lfine = Lgeom + λrenderLrender + λpriorLprior.
(16)
4. Experiments
We use the USC-HairSalon [23] dataset to pre-train the
strand parametric model and hairstyle diffusion module.
This dataset consists of 343 hairstyles aligned with the
template bust mesh. We then evaluate our method using
both synthetic and real-world data. We use two synthetic
scenes [76] to conduct a quantitative comparison using the
ground-truth strand-based geometry.
For the real-world
data, we use H3DS Dataset [56] of multi-view images with
non-uniform lighting and monocular video data captured
using a smartphone.
6


Image
UNISURF
NeuS
DeepMVSHair
Ours
Figure 4: We compare our method with volumetric and strand-based 3D reconstruction systems using a real-world multi-
view dataset [56]. While baseline volumetric approaches [46, 66] can only produce coarse hair geometry, our method is
able to reconstruct fine details using strands. We also achieve more robust and accurate results than the existing multi-view
hair reconstruction methods [30]. For additional results, please refer to the supplementary materials. Digital zoom-in is
recommended.
4.1. Implementation details
To train our method on real-world data we use off-the-
shelf methods [26, 35] to obtain segmentation masks for the
hair and bust. To parameterize the geometry texture map,
we use a UNet network that predicts it from a constant mesh
grid. Similarly to the diffusion model training, we calculate
the denoising error Lprior by averaging over the mini-batch
of different offsets, noise ϵ, and noise levels σ. In total, our
reconstruction pipeline takes three days per subject on a sin-
gle NVIDIA RTX 4090: one day for the first, and two days
for the second stage. For more training details and hyperpa-
rameters, please refer to the supplementary materials.
4.2. Real-world evaluation
Baselines.
We compare our method against popular
3D reconstruction approaches [46, 66], as well as meth-
ods [30, 73] designed for strand-based reconstruction, us-
ing publicly available scenes from the H3DS [56] dataset.
NeuS [66] is a multi-view reconstruction approach that
learns the scene geometry as the zero level-set of a signed
distance function using volume rendering.
This method
can reconstruct non-Lambertian surfaces, making it well-
suited for hair reconstruction. UNISURF [46] is another
multi-view approach based on occupancy fields learned via
volume rendering.
This method is specifically tailored
to handle semi-transparent objects, such as hair.
Deep-
MVSHair [30] is a multi-view image-guided method for
realistic strand-based reconstruction that can operate in a
sparse-view scenario and under non-uniform lighting con-
ditions. Due to memory constraints, this method is trained
to produce reconstructions using twelve views. We also pro-
vide comparisons with a single image NeuralHDHair [73]
method in the supplementary materials.
The qualitative results are shown in Figure 4. Note that
our segmented modeling approach allows us to reconstruct
realistic hair alongside the accurate bust geometry. It sets
us apart from all the baseline methods, which can only re-
construct coarse hair geometry. Furthermore, our approach
is able to reconstruct strands in poorly visible regions.
Finally, we evaluate our method in a challenging case of
monocular video capture. The results are provided in Fig-
ure 5. Our method is fully capable of handling this chal-
lenging use case and keeps the high fidelity and realism of
the reconstructed hair. We include more examples in the
supplementary materials.
7


Figure 5: Our method can obtain high-fidelity hair reconstructions even from a monocular video. For more results, please
refer to the supplementary materials.
Thresholds: mm / degrees
Method
2/20
3/30
4/40
2/20
3/30
4/40
2/20
3/30
4/40
Precision
Recall
F-score
Lgeom
57.3
81.9
90.4
7.8
13.8
19.8
13.7
23.5
32.5
w/ Lrender [58]
58.6
82.4
91.0
8.0
13.9
21.5
14.1
23.7
34.7
w/ Lrgb
60.5
83.2
91.5
7.6
13.8
21.0
13.5
23.7
34.1
w/ Lmask
56.5
81.5
90.4
8.7
14.7
21.0
15.0
24.9
34.1
Lfine
52.9
78.1
88.4
9.8
17.8
26.3
16.4
28.7
40.3
Table 1: We provide an extensive quantitative evaluation
of individual components of our method. Please refer to
Section 4.3 for the discussion.
GT
w/o Curv. [58]
Ours
Lgeom
w/ Lprior
Figure 6: Ablation on curvature (top) and diffusion losses
(bottom). The incorporation of curvature loss allows us to
better model curly strands, while the diffusion tackles the
problems with hair growth directions and unrealistic angles
(insets show a subset of hairs for clarity).
4.3. Ablation study
We conduct an ablation study using both synthetic and
real-world datasets. Here, we also include the comparison
with Neural Strands [58], since our approach, in some as-
pects, builds on top of it. However, we cannot compare
our method against it directly as this method is closed-
source, requires manual annotation of the hair growth di-
rections, and relies on an MVS-based hair reconstruction
method [45], which is sensitive to non-uniform lighting
conditions and poorly handles hair specularities.
We employed the same approach for quantitative eval-
uation as in [58]. We first render the ground-truth strands
using Blender [9] and reconstruct them.
We then fol-
low [45, 58] and measure precision, recall, and F-score be-
tween our predicted strands and ground truth using both dis-
tance and angular errors as thresholds. The comparison re-
sults are shown in Table 1. First, we see that our rendering
loss Lrgb improves over the base Lrender from [58] in terms
of precision, while the rendering mask loss Lmask achieves
better recall and an aggregated F-score. Finally, our com-
plete model Lfine, which combines together geometric, ren-
dering, and diffusion-based losses, further improves these
results, achieving the highest recall and F-score across all
experiments.
In Figure 6, we conduct a qualitative ablation study to
evaluate the effect of a diffusion prior Lprior and a curvature
loss term in the strand parametric model. Notice that the
diffusion-based prior achieves substantially higher realism
of the internal part of the hairstyle. For the curvature loss,
its effect is visible when modeling curly hairstyles. Addi-
tional qualitative and quantitative results are provided in the
supplementary materials.
5. Discussion and limitations
We have presented a method capable of detailed hu-
man hair reconstruction from monocular videos with un-
controlled lighting. To achieve that, we employ both vol-
umetric and strand-based hair representations and combine
them with differential hair rendering and global hairstyle
priors. We demonstrate the efficacy of our approach by con-
ducting extensive qualitative and quantitative evaluations.
The main limitations of our method can be seen in Fig-
ures 5-6, as well as additional scenes in the supplementary
materials. Our system still struggles to represent curly hair
and relies on accurate hair and body segmentation masks
to produce the reconstructions. In principle, it is possible
to address these limitations by extending the dataset for the
hairstyle prior training, as well as employing more robust
human matting systems.
8


Acknowledgements
We thank Samsung ML Platform for providing the com-
putational resources for this work. We also sincerely thank
Zhiyi Kuang for aiding us with the DeepMVSHair compar-
ison and Youyi Zheng — for providing the reconstructions
of NeuralHDHair. We also thank David Svitov for his in-
sightful suggestions on diffusion models.
References
[1] Matan Atzmon and Yaron Lipman. Sal: Sign agnostic learn-
ing of shapes from raw data. 2020 IEEE/CVF Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pages
2562–2571, 2019. 5, 13
[2] J. E. Bresenham. Algorithm for computer control of a digital
plotter. IBM Systems Journal, 4(1):25–30, 1965. 6
[3] Adrian Bulat and Georgios Tzimiropoulos. How far are we
from solving the 2d & 3d face alignment problem? (and a
dataset of 230,000 3d facial landmarks).
In International
Conference on Computer Vision, 2017. 5, 13
[4] Chen Cao, Tomas Simon, Jin Kyu Kim, Gabriel Schwartz,
Michael Zollhoefer, Shunsuke Saito, Stephen Lombardi,
Shih-En Wei, Danielle Belko, Shoou-I Yu, Yaser Sheikh,
and Jason M. Saragih. Authentic volumetric avatars from
a phone scan. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG), 41:1
– 19, 2022. 1
[5] Z. Cao, G. Hidalgo Martinez, T. Simon, S. Wei, and Y. A.
Sheikh. Openpose: Realtime multi-person 2d pose estima-
tion using part affinity fields. IEEE Transactions on Pattern
Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 2019. 13
[6] Zhe Cao, Tomas Simon, Shih-En Wei, and Yaser Sheikh.
Realtime multi-person 2d pose estimation using part affinity
fields. In CVPR, 2017. 13
[7] Menglei Chai, Tianjia Shao, Hongzhi Wu, Yanlin Weng, and
Kun Zhou. Autohair: fully automatic hair modeling from a
single image. ACM Trans. Graph., 35:116:1–116:12, 2016.
2, 3
[8] Ricky T. Q. Chen, Yulia Rubanova, Jesse Bettencourt, and
David Duvenaud.
Neural ordinary differential equations,
2018. 12
[9] Blender Online Community. Blender - a 3D modelling and
rendering package. Blender Foundation, Stichting Blender
Foundation, Amsterdam, 2023. 1, 8, 12
[10] Keenan Crane, Fernando de Goes, Mathieu Desbrun, and Pe-
ter Schr¨oder. Digital geometry processing with discrete ex-
terior calculus.
In International Conference on Computer
Graphics and Interactive Techniques, 2013. 15
[11] Franccois Darmon, B. Bascle, Jean-Clement Devaux, Pascal
Monasse, and Mathieu Aubry. Improving neural implicit sur-
faces geometry with patch warping. 2022 IEEE/CVF Confer-
ence on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR),
pages 6250–6259, 2021. 1
[12] Paul E. Debevec, Tim Hawkins, Chris Tchou, Haarm-Pieter
Duiker, Westley Sarokin, and Mark Sagar. Acquiring the re-
flectance field of a human face. Proceedings of the 27th an-
nual conference on Computer graphics and interactive tech-
niques, 2000. 1
[13] Yao Feng, Vasileios Choutas, Timo Bolkart, Dimitrios
Tzionas, and Michael Black. Collaborative regression of ex-
pressive bodies using moderation. In International Confer-
ence on 3D Vision (3DV), pages 792–804, Dec. 2021. 13
[14] Yao Feng, Haiwen Feng, Michael J. Black, and Timo
Bolkart.
Learning an animatable detailed 3D face model
from in-the-wild images. volume 40, 2021. 13
[15] Qiancheng Fu, Qingshan Xu, Yew-Soon Ong, and Wenbing
Tao. Geo-neus: Geometry-consistent neural implicit surfaces
learning for multi-view reconstruction. Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2022. 1, 5
[16] Guy Gafni, Justus Thies, Michael Zollhofer, and Matthias
Nießner. Dynamic neural radiance fields for monocular 4d
facial avatar reconstruction.
2021 IEEE/CVF Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pages
8645–8654, 2020. 1, 2
[17] Simon Giebenhain, Tobias Kirschstein, Markos Georgopou-
los, Martin R¨unz, Lourdes de Agapito, and Matthias
Nießner. Learning neural parametric head models. ArXiv,
abs/2212.02761, 2022. 1, 2
[18] Philip-William Grassal,
Malte Prinzler,
Titus Leistner,
Carsten Rother, Matthias Nießner, and Justus Thies. Neural
head avatars from monocular rgb videos. 2022 IEEE/CVF
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
(CVPR), pages 18632–18643, 2021. 1, 2
[19] Amos Gropp, Lior Yariv, Niv Haim, Matan Atzmon, and
Yaron Lipman. Implicit geometric regularization for learning
shapes. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
2020. 2, 5, 13
[20] Kaiming He, X. Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep
residual learning for image recognition. 2016 IEEE Confer-
ence on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR),
pages 770–778, 2015. 12
[21] Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising diffu-
sion probabilistic models. In Proceedings of the 34th Inter-
national Conference on Neural Information Processing Sys-
tems, NIPS’20, Red Hook, NY, USA, 2020. Curran Asso-
ciates Inc. 2, 3, 6
[22] Yang Hong, Bo Peng, Haiyao Xiao, Ligang Liu, and Juyong
Zhang.
Headnerf: A realtime nerf-based parametric head
model. 2022 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pages 20342–20352, 2021. 1
[23] Liwen Hu, Chongyang Ma, Linjie Luo, and Hao Li. Single-
view hair modeling using a hairstyle database. ACM Trans-
actions on Graphics (TOG), 34:1 – 9, 2015. 2, 3, 6, 12
[24] Justin Johnson, Nikhila Ravi, Jeremy Reizenstein, David
Novotny, Shubham Tulsiani, Christoph Lassner, and Steve
Branson. Accelerating 3d deep learning with pytorch3d. In
SIGGRAPH Asia 2020 Courses, SA ’20, New York, NY,
USA, 2020. Association for Computing Machinery. 6
[25] Tero Karras, Miika Aittala, Timo Aila, and Samuli Laine.
Elucidating the design space of diffusion-based generative
models. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Sys-
tems (NeurIPS), 2022. 2, 3, 4, 6, 13
[26] Zhanghan Ke, Jiayu Sun, Kaican Li, Qiong Yan, and Ryn-
son W.H. Lau. Modnet: Real-time trimap-free portrait mat-
ting via objective decomposition. In AAAI, 2022. 7, 12
[27] Taras Khakhulin, V. V. Sklyarova, Victor S. Lempitsky, and
Egor Zakharov. Realistic one-shot mesh-based head avatars.
In European Conference on Computer Vision, 2022. 1, 2
9


[28] Diederik P. Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for
stochastic optimization. In Yoshua Bengio and Yann LeCun,
editors, 3rd International Conference on Learning Represen-
tations, ICLR 2015, San Diego, CA, USA, May 7-9, 2015,
Conference Track Proceedings, 2015. 13, 14
[29] Diederik P. Kingma and Max Welling. Auto-encoding vari-
ational bayes. CoRR, abs/1312.6114, 2013. 4
[30] Zhiyi Kuang, Yiyang Chen, Hongbo Fu, Kun Zhou, and
Youyi Zheng.
Deepmvshair:
Deep hair modeling from
sparse views.
SIGGRAPH Asia 2022 Conference Papers,
2022. 2, 3, 7, 15
[31] Thomas Lewiner, H´elio Lopes, Antˆonio Wilson Vieira, and
Geovan Tavares.
Efficient implementation of marching
cubes’ cases with topological guarantees. Journal of Graph-
ics Tools, 8:1 – 15, 2003. 6, 14
[32] Tianye Li, Timo Bolkart, Michael. J. Black, Hao Li, and
Javier Romero. Learning a model of facial shape and ex-
pression from 4D scans. ACM Transactions on Graphics,
(Proc. SIGGRAPH Asia), 36(6):194:1–194:17, 2017. 2, 3, 5,
12
[33] Chen-Hsuan Lin, Wei-Chiu Ma, Antonio Torralba, and Si-
mon Lucey. Barf: Bundle-adjusting neural radiance fields. In
IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV),
2021. 12
[34] Dong C. Liu and Jorge Nocedal. On the limited memory bfgs
method for large scale optimization. Mathematical Program-
ming, 45:503–528, 1989. 13
[35] Kunliang Liu, Ouk Choi, Jianming Wang, and Wonjun
Hwang. Cdgnet: Class distribution guided network for hu-
man parsing. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pages
4473–4482, June 2022. 7, 12
[36] Shichen Liu, Tianye Li, Weikai Chen, and Hao Li. Soft ras-
terizer: A differentiable renderer for image-based 3d reason-
ing. 2019 IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer
Vision (ICCV), pages 7707–7716, 2019. 2, 6
[37] Stephen Lombardi, Tomas Simon, Jason M. Saragih, Gabriel
Schwartz, Andreas M. Lehrmann, and Yaser Sheikh. Neural
volumes. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG), 38:1 – 14,
2019. 1
[38] Stephen Lombardi,
Tomas Simon,
Gabriel Schwartz,
Michael Zollhoefer, Yaser Sheikh, and Jason M. Saragih.
Mixture of volumetric primitives for efficient neural render-
ing. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG), 40:1 – 13, 2021.
1
[39] Matthew Loper, Naureen Mahmood, Javier Romero, Gerard
Pons-Moll, and Michael J. Black. Smpl: a skinned multi-
person linear model. ACM Trans. Graph., 34:248:1–248:16,
2015. 2
[40] Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter.
Decoupled weight de-
cay regularization. In International Conference on Learning
Representations, 2017. 13
[41] Morgan McGuire, Tiancheng Sun, Giljoo Nam, Carlos
Aliaga, Christophe Hery, and Ravi Ramamoorthi. Human
hair inverse rendering using multi-view photometric data. In
Eurographics Symposium on Rendering, 2021. 1
[42] Ishit Mehta, Micha¨el Gharbi, Connelly Barnes, Eli Shecht-
man, Ravi Ramamoorthi, and Manmohan Chandraker. Mod-
ulated periodic activations for generalizable local functional
representations. 2021 IEEE/CVF International Conference
on Computer Vision (ICCV), pages 14194–14203, 2021. 12
[43] Marko Mihajlovi´c, Aayush Bansal, Michael Zollhoefer, Siyu
Tang, and Shunsuke Saito.
Keypointnerf:
Generalizing
image-based volumetric avatars using relative spatial encod-
ing of keypoints. In European Conference on Computer Vi-
sion, 2022. 1
[44] Ben Mildenhall, Pratul P. Srinivasan, Matthew Tancik,
Jonathan T. Barron, Ravi Ramamoorthi, and Ren Ng. Nerf:
Representing scenes as neural radiance fields for view syn-
thesis. In European Conference on Computer Vision, 2020.
2, 6, 13, 14
[45] Giljoo Nam, Chenglei Wu, Min H. Kim, and Yaser Sheikh.
Strand-accurate multi-view hair capture.
2019 IEEE/CVF
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
(CVPR), pages 155–164, 2019. 1, 2, 3, 8, 13
[46] Michael Oechsle, Songyou Peng, and Andreas Geiger.
Unisurf:
Unifying neural implicit surfaces and radiance
fields for multi-view reconstruction. In International Con-
ference on Computer Vision (ICCV), 2021. 7
[47] Ahmed A A Osman, Timo Bolkart, and Michael J. Black.
STAR: A sparse trained articulated human body regressor.
In European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV), pages
598–613, 2020. 2
[48] Ahmed A A Osman, Timo Bolkart, Dimitrios Tzionas, and
Michael J. Black. SUPR: A sparse unified part-based human
body model. In European Conference on Computer Vision
(ECCV), 2022. 2
[49] Sylvain Paris, H´ector M. Brice˜no, and Franc¸ois X. Sillion.
Capture of hair geometry from multiple images. ACM SIG-
GRAPH 2004 Papers, 2004. 2, 5
[50] Jeong Joon Park,
Peter R. Florence,
Julian Straub,
Richard A. Newcombe, and S. Lovegrove. Deepsdf: Learn-
ing continuous signed distance functions for shape represen-
tation. 2019 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pages 165–174, 2019. 2, 4
[51] Keunhong Park, U. Sinha, Jonathan T. Barron, Sofien
Bouaziz, Dan B. Goldman, Steven M. Seitz, and Ricardo
Martin-Brualla. Nerfies: Deformable neural radiance fields.
2021 IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vi-
sion (ICCV), pages 5845–5854, 2020. 1
[52] Keunhong Park, Utkarsh Sinha, Peter Hedman, Jonathan T.
Barron, Sofien Bouaziz, Dan B Goldman, Ricardo Martin-
Brualla, and Steven M. Seitz.
Hypernerf:
A higher-
dimensional representation for topologically varying neural
radiance fields. ACM Trans. Graph., 40, 2021. 1
[53] Georgios Pavlakos, Vasileios Choutas, Nima Ghorbani,
Timo Bolkart, Ahmed A. A. Osman, Dimitrios Tzionas, and
Michael J. Black. Expressive body capture: 3d hands, face,
and body from a single image. 2019 IEEE/CVF Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pages
10967–10977, 2019. 2
[54] Ben Poole, Ajay Jain, Jonathan T. Barron, and Ben Milden-
hall. Dreamfusion: Text-to-3d using 2d diffusion. arXiv,
2022. 3, 6
[55] Ruslan Rakhimov, Andrei-Timotei Ardelean, Victor Lem-
pitsky, and Evgeny Burnaev. Npbg++: Accelerating neu-
ral point-based graphics. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
10
