Title: Text-Conditioned Generative Model of 3D Strand-Based Human Hairstyles

Text-Conditioned Generative Model of 3D Strand-based Human Hairstyles
Vanessa Sklyarova1,2
Egor Zakharov2
Otmar Hilliges2
Michael J. Black1
Justus Thies1,3
1Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems
2ETH Z¨urich
3Technical University of Darmstadt
...afro hairstyle...
...voluminous straight hair...
...man haircut...
...wavy short hairstyle...
...bob haircut...
...long wavy hairstyle...
...long straight hair...
...short curly hairstyle...
Figure 1. Given a text description, our method produces realistic human hairstyles. The usage of a 3D strand-based geometry representation
allows it to be easily incorporated into existing computer graphics pipelines for simulation and rendering [3, 7, 9].
Abstract
We present HAAR, a new strand-based generative model
for 3D human hairstyles. Specifically, based on textual in-
puts, HAAR produces 3D hairstyles that could be used as
production-level assets in modern computer graphics en-
gines. Current AI-based generative models take advantage
of powerful 2D priors to reconstruct 3D content in the form
of point clouds, meshes, or volumetric functions.
How-
ever, by using the 2D priors, they are intrinsically limited
to only recovering the visual parts. Highly occluded hair
structures can not be reconstructed with those methods, and
they only model the “outer shell”, which is not ready to be
used in physics-based rendering or simulation pipelines. In
contrast, we propose a first text-guided generative method
that uses 3D hair strands as an underlying representation.
Leveraging 2D visual question-answering (VQA) systems,
we automatically annotate synthetic hair models that are
generated from a small set of artist-created hairstyles. This
allows us to train a latent diffusion model that operates in
a common hairstyle UV space. In qualitative and quantita-
tive studies, we demonstrate the capabilities of the proposed
model and compare it to existing hairstyle generation ap-
proaches. For results, please refer to our project page†.
1. Introduction
There has been rapid progress in creating realistic, animat-
able 3D face and head avatars from images, video, and text.
What is still missing is hair. Existing methods typically
represent hair with a coarse mesh geometry, implicit sur-
faces, or neural radiance fields. None of these representa-
tions are compatible with the strand-based models used by
existing rendering systems and do not enable animation of
the resulting avatars with natural hair dynamics. Modeling
and generating realistic 3D hair remains a key bottleneck
to creating realistic, personalized avatars. We address this
problem with HAAR (Hair: Automatic Animatable Recon-
struction), which enables the generation of realistic and di-
verse hairstyles based solely on text descriptions. HAAR is
† https://haar.is.tue.mpg.de/
1
arXiv:2312.11666v1  [cs.CV]  18 Dec 2023


the first text-driven generative model that produces a classi-
cal strand-based hair representation that can be immediately
imported into rendering systems and animated realistically.
This approach replaces the complex and time-consuming
process of manually creating 3D hairstyles with a chat-like
text interface that can be used by a novice to create high-
quality 3D hair assets.
Previous work exploits generative models as learned pri-
ors to create 3D strand-based hair from images, videos,
or random noise.
In particular, Neural Haircut [47] re-
constructs high-fidelity hairstyles from smartphone video
captures without any specialized equipment by leveraging
a pre-trained generative diffusion model. However, their
strand-based generative model does not provide control
over the geometry of the resulting hairstyles, substantially
limiting the range of applications.
Recently, GroomGen
[57] introduced an unconditional generative model of hair.
In contrast, we propose the first text-conditioned generative
model for strand-based hairstyles that can be used for auto-
mated and fast hair asset generation.
Text-conditioned generative models like Stable Diffu-
sion [42] are widely used for image and video gener-
ation and can be used to generate 3D shape from text
[5, 6, 14, 25, 28, 29, 32, 38, 39, 48, 49, 54] by exploit-
ing Score Distillation Sampling (SDS) [38]. These meth-
ods convert textual descriptions into 3D assets that, when
rendered into multiple views, align with generated 2D im-
ages via differentiable rendering. These methods represent
3D shapes either as meshes [5, 25, 39], point clouds [6, 48]
or volumes [28, 29, 32, 38, 49]. In particular, TECA [54]
demonstrates how hair can be generated from text using
a neural radiance field [34], combined with a traditional
mesh-based head model [23]. However, the inherent prob-
lem with these SDS-based solutions is that they only capture
the outer visible surface of the 3D shape. Even volumet-
ric representations do not have a meaningful internal hair
structure [54]. Thus, they can not be used for downstream
applications like animation in graphics engines [3, 7].
Instead, what we seek is a solution with the follow-
ing properties: (1) the hair is represented using classical
3D strands so that the hairstyle is compatible with exist-
ing rendering tools, (2) hair is generated from easy-to-use
text prompts, (3) the generated hair covers a wide range of
diverse and realistic hairstyles, (4) the results are more real-
istic than current generative models based SDS. To this end,
we develop a text-guided generation method that produces
strand-based hairstyles via a latent diffusion model. Specif-
ically, we devise a latent diffusion model following the un-
conditional model used in Neural Haircut [47]. A hairstyle
is represented on the scalp of a 3D head model as a tex-
ture map where the values of the texture map correspond to
the latent representation of 3D hair strands. The individual
strands are defined in a latent space of a VAE that captures
the geometric variation in the hair strand shape. To gener-
ate novel hair texture maps, we infer a diffusion network
that takes a noise input and text conditioning. From the
generated hair texture map, we can sample individual latent
strands and reconstruct the corresponding 3D hair strands.
There are three remaining, interrelated, problems to ad-
dress: (1) We need a dataset of 3D hairstyles to train the
VAE and diffusion model. (2) We need training data of
hairstyles with text descriptions to relate hairstyles to our
representation. (3) We need a method to condition gen-
erated hair on text. We address each of these problems.
First, we combine three different 3D hair datasets and aug-
ment the data to construct a training set of about 10K 3D
hairstyles. Second, one of our key novelties is in how we
obtain hairstyle descriptions.
Here, we leverage a large
vision-language model (VLM) [27] to generate hairstyle de-
scriptions from images rendered from the 3D dataset. Un-
fortunately, existing visual question-answering (VQA) sys-
tems [22, 26, 27] are inaccurate and do not produce coher-
ent hairstyle descriptions. To address these problems, we
design a custom data-annotation pipeline that uses a pre-
generated set of prompts that we feed into a VQA sys-
tem [26] and produce final annotations by combining their
responses in a single textual description. Finally, we train a
diffusion model to produce the hair texture encoding condi-
tioned on the encoding of textual hairstyle descriptions.
As Figure 1 illustrates, our strand-based representation
can be used in classical computer graphics pipelines to real-
istically densify and render the hair [3, 7, 9]. We also show
how the latent representation of hair can be leveraged to per-
form various semantic manipulations, such as up-sampling
the number of strands in the generated hairstyle (resulting in
better quality than the classical graphics methods) or editing
hairstyles with text prompts. We perform quantitative com-
parisons with Neural Haircut as well as an ablation study
to understand which design choices are critical. In contrast
to SDS-based methods like TECA, HAAR is significantly
more efficient, requiring seconds instead of hours to gener-
ate the hairstyle.
Our contributions can be summarized as follows:
• We propose a first text-conditioned diffusion model for
realistic 3D strand-based hairstyle generation,
• We showcase how the learned latent hairstyle representa-
tions can be used for semantic editing,
• We developed a method for accurate and automated an-
notation of synthetic hairstyle assets using off-the-shelf
VQA systems.
The model will be available for research purposes.
2. Related work
Recently, multiple text-to-3D approaches [5, 6, 14, 25, 28,
29, 32, 38, 39, 48, 49, 54] have emerged that were in-
2


spired by the success of text-guided image generation [40–
42, 44]. A body of work of particular interest to us is the
one that uses image-space guidance to generate 3D shapes
in a learning-by-synthesis paradigm. Initially, these meth-
ods used CLIP [41] embeddings shared between images and
text to ensure that the results generated by the model ad-
here to the textual description [2, 12, 33]. However, the
Score Distillation Sampling procedure (SDS) [38] has re-
cently gained more popularity since it could leverage text-
to-image generative diffusion models, such as Stable Dif-
fusion [42], to guide the creation of 3D assets from text,
achieving higher quality. Multiple concurrent methods em-
ploy this SDS approach to map textual description into a hu-
man avatar [4, 14, 19, 24, 54]. In particular, the TECA [54]
system focuses on generating volumetric hairstyles in the
form of neural radiance fields (NeRFs) [34]. However, these
approaches can only generate the outer visible surface of the
hair without internal structure, which prevents it from be-
ing used out-of-the-box in downstream applications, such
as simulation and physics-based rendering. Moreover, the
SDS procedure used to produce the reconstructions is no-
toriously slow and may require hours of optimization to
achieve convergence for a given textual prompt. Our ap-
proach is significantly more efficient, and is capable of gen-
erating and realistically rendering the hairstyles given tex-
tual prompts in less than a minute.
In contrast to the methods mentioned above, we also gen-
erate the hairstyles in the form of strands. Strand-accurate
hair modeling has manifold applications in computer vision
and graphics as it allows subsequent physics-based render-
ing and simulation using off-the-shelf tools [3, 7, 9]. One of
the primary use cases for the strand-based generative mod-
eling has historically been the 3D hair reconstruction sys-
tems [13, 20, 35, 43, 45–47, 52, 53, 55, 56]. Among the
settings where it is most often used is the so-called one-shot
case, where a hairstyle must be predicted using only a sin-
gle image [13, 52, 55]. Approaches that tackle it leverage
synthetic datasets of strand-based assets to train the models
and then employ detailed cues extracted from the images,
such as orientation maps [37], to guide the generation pro-
cess. However, these systems are unsuitable for semantics-
based or even unconditional generation of hairstyles, as
they rely heavily on these cues for guidance. A group of
methods that is more closely related to ours is Neural Hair-
cut [47] and GroomGen [57], in which a synthetic dataset of
hairstyle assets is leveraged to train an unconditional gen-
erative model [16, 18, 42]. While useful for regularizing
multi-view hair reconstruction [47], the degree of control
over the synthesized output in such methods is missing.
Our work addresses the issue of controllability in generative
models for hair and is the first one to provide strand-based
hairstyle generation capabilities given textual descriptions.
3. Method
Given a textual description that contains information about
hair curliness, length, and style, our method generates real-
istic strand-based hair assets. The resulting hairstyles can be
immediately used in computer graphics tools that can ren-
der and animate the hair in a physically plausible fashion.
Our pipeline is depicted in Figure 2. At its core is a latent
diffusion model, which is conditioned on a hairstyle text
embedding. It operates on a latent space that is constructed
via a Variational Autoencoder (VAE) [18]. Following [43],
this VAE is trained to embed the geometry of individual
strands into a lower-dimensional latent space. During infer-
ence, the diffusion model generates this representation from
Gaussian noise and the input text prompt, which is then up-
sampled to increase the number of strands and decoded us-
ing a VAE decoder to retrieve the 3D hair strands.
3.1. Hairstyle parametrization.
We represent a 3D hairstyle as a set of 3D hair strands that
are uniformly distributed over the scalp. Specifically, we
define a hair map H with resolution 256 × 256 that cor-
responds to a scalp region of the 3D head model. Within
this map, each pixel stores a single hair strand S as a poly-
line. As mentioned previously, our diffusion model is not
directly operating on these 3D polylines, but on their com-
pressed latent embeddings z. To produce z that encodes the
strand S, we first convert the latter into the local basis de-
fined by the Frenet frame of the face where the strand root
is located. On this normalized data, we train a variational
auto-encoder, which gives us access to an encoder E(S) and
a decoder G(z).Using the encoder E(S), we encode the in-
dividual hair strands in the hair map H, resulting in a latent
map Z that has the same spatial resolution. The decoded
strand-based hair map is then denoted as ˆH. In summary,
with a slight abuse of notation, the maps are related to each
other as follows: Z = E(H), and ˆH = G(Z).
3.2. Conditional Hair Diffusion Model
We use a pre-trained text encoder τ [22], that encodes the
hairstyle description P into the embedding τ(P). This em-
bedding is used as conditioning to the denoising network
via a cross-attention mechanism:
Attention(Q, K, V ) = softmax
QKT
√
d

· V,
(1)
where Q = W (i)
Q · ϕi(Zt), K = W (i)
K · τ(P), V = W (i)
V
·
τ(P) with learnable projection matrices W (i)
Q , W (i)
K , W (i)
V .
The denoising network is a 2D U-Net [15], where ϕi(Zt)
denotes i-th intermediate representations of the U-Net pro-
duced for the latent hair map Zt at the denoising step t. For
our training, we employ the EDM [16] formulation, fol-
lowing [47]. We denote the latent hair map with noise as
3


Hairstyle
Encoder
Subsample
& add noise
Diffusion model
Generated
hairstyle
Training
Decoder
Upsample
... woman with afro
hairstyle …
Inference
E
H
D
Latent hair map
G
τθ
Text embedding
P
Z
Cross-attn.
Generated hair map
ˆZ
ˆH
τθ
Sec. 3.1
Sec. 3.4
Sec. 3.2
Sec. 3.3
Sec. 3.1
Caption
Figure 2. Overview. We present our new method for text-guided and strand-based hair generation. For each hairstyle H in the training
set, we produce latent hair maps Z and annotate them with textual captions P using off-the-shelf VQA systems [26] and our custom
annotation pipeline. Then, we train a conditional diffusion model D [16] to generate the guiding strands in this latent space and use a
latent upsampling procedure to reconstruct dense hairstyles that contain up to a hundred thousand strands given textual descriptions. The
generated hairstyles are then rendered using off-the-shelf computer graphics techniques [9].
Zt = Z + ϵ · σt, where ϵ ∼N(0, I), and σt is the noise
strength. We then use a denoiser D to predict the output:
Dθ(Zt, σt, P) = cs
t · Zt + co
t · Fθ
 ci
t · Zt, cn
t , τ(P)

, (2)
where the cs
t, co
t, ci
t and cn
t are the preconditioning factors
for the noise level σt that follow [16], and Fθ denotes a
U-Net network. The optimization problem is defined as:
min
θ
Eσt,ϵ,Z,P

λt · ∥Dθ(Zt, σt, P) −Z∥2
2

,
(3)
where λt denotes a weighting factor for a given noise level.
3.3. Upsampling
Due to the limited amount of available 3D hairstyles, the
diffusion model is trained on a downsampled latent hair map
Z′ with resolution 32 × 32 and, thus, only generates so-
called ’guiding hair strands’. To increase the number of
strands in the generated results, we upsample the latent hair
map to the resolution of 512 × 512. A common way of
upsampling a strand-based hairstyle to increase the number
of strands is via interpolation between individual polylines.
In modern computer graphics engines [3, 7] multiple ap-
proaches, such as Nearest Neighbour (NN) and bilinear in-
terpolation are used. Applying these interpolation schemes
leads to over-smoothing or clumping results. In some more
advanced pipelines, these schemes are combined with dis-
tance measures based on the proximity of strand origins
or the similarity of the curves. Additionally, Blender and
Maya [3, 7] introduce an option of adding noise into the in-
terpolation results to further prevent clumping of the hair
strands and increase realism. However, the described inter-
polation procedure requires a lot of manual effort and needs
to be done for each hairstyle separately to obtain optimal
parameters and resolve undesired penetrations.
In this work, we propose an automatic approach with in-
terpolation of the hairstyle in latent space by blending be-
tween nearest neighbor and bilinear interpolation schemes.
In this way, we aim to preserve the local structure of strands
near a partition and apply smoothing in regions with similar
strand directions. To calculate the blending weights, we first
compute the cosine similarity between neighboring 3D hair
strands on the mesh grid and apply the non-linear function
f(·) to control the influence of the particular interpolation
type, which we empirically derived to be as follows:
f(x) =
(
1 −1.63 · x5
where x ≤0.9
0.4 −0.4 · x
x > 0.9,
(4)
where x is the cosine similarity. Our final interpolation for
each point on the mesh grid is defined as a blending be-
tween the nearest neighbor and bilinear interpolations with
the weight f(x) and (1 −f(x)) correspondingly. The de-
fined upsampling method ensures that in the vicinity of a
partition, the weight of the nearest neighbor decreases lin-
early, and then diminishes at a polynomial rate. As a result
of this scheme, we obtain realistic geometry in the regions
with low similarity among strands. On top of that, we add
Gaussian noise to the interpolated latents to increase the hair
strands diversity, resulting in a more natural look.
3.4. Data generation
3D hairstyle data. For training and evaluating the diffusion
model, we use a small artist-created hairstyle dataset, that
consists of 40 high-quality hairstyles with around 100,000
strands.
To increase the diversity, we combine it with
two publicly available datasets: CT2Hair [46] and USC-
HairSalon [13] that consist of 10 and 343 hairstyles, respec-
tively. We align the three datasets to the same parametric
head model and additionally augment each hairstyle using
realistic squeezing, stretching, cutting, and curliness aug-
mentations. In total, we train the model on 9825 hairstyles.
Hairstyle description.
As these 3D hairstyles do not
come with textual annotations, we use the VQA model
4


Q: What is the type of current hairstyle?
What is the relative length of the hairstyle?
What is the texture of current hairstyle?
Describe actors with similar hairstyle type.
Visual Question Answering (VQA)
A: The type of the hairstyle is bob …
… the length is short ...
… the hairstyle is straight …
… This hairstyle is very popular ...
Hairstyle
Embedding
Text Encoding
∑
N
N
Figure 3. Dataset collection. Rendered from frontal and back
view hairstyles along with a predefined set of questions Q are sent
through VQA [26, 27] to obtain hairstyle description, which is
further encoded using frozen text encoder network [22].
LLaVA [26, 27] to automatically produce hairstyle descrip-
tions from a set of predefined questions (see Figure 3).
To do that, we first render all collected hairstyles using
Blender [7] from frontal and back camera views. We use
the standard head model and neutral shading for hairstyles
to prevent bias to any particular type of hairstyle because
of color or gender information.
With the help of Chat-
GPT [36], we design a set of prompts, that include specific
questions about length, texture, hairstyle type, bang, etc., as
well as a set of general questions about historical meaning,
professional look, occasions for such hairstyle, celebrities
with similar type to increase generalization and variability
of our conditioning model. We then use a random subset of
these prompts for each hairstyle in the dataset to increase
the diversity of annotations. For a full list of prompts that
were used, please refer to the suppl. material.
The quality of visual systems is highly restricted by the
diversity of data used during training. We have observed
in our experiments that the accuracy of the produced hair
captions is relatively low, or they contain very broad de-
scriptions. In particular, we have noticed that the existing
VQA systems have problems accurately reasoning about
the hair length or the side of the parting. To improve the
quality of VQA answers, similarly to [58], we add an ad-
ditional system prompt “If you are not sure say it honestly.
Do not imagine any contents that are not in the image”,
which decreases the likelihood of the model hallucinating
its responses. Further, we have observed that the VQA sys-
tem works better when it does not use information from the
previous answers. That allows us to not accumulate erro-
neous descriptions during the annotation session. We have
also observed that the LLAVA model is biased toward con-
firming the provided descriptions instead of reasoning, so
introducing a set of choices to the prompts substantially im-
proves the results. Finally, we calculate the embeddings of
the resulting hairstyle descriptions P using a BLIP encoder
τ for both frontal and back views and average them to pro-
duce the conditioning used during training.
3.5. Training details
To train the diffusion model, we sample a batch of hairstyles
at each iteration, align them on a mesh grid of 256 × 256
resolution, and, then, subsample it into a size of 32×32. By
training the diffusion model on these subsampled hairstyles
we improve convergence and avoid overfitting. To acceler-
ate the training, we use the soft Min-SNR [10] weighting
strategy. It tackles the conflicting directions in optimization
by using an adaptive loss weighting strategy. For more de-
tails, please refer to the original Min-SNR paper [10]. To
evaluate the performance, we utilize an Exponential Mov-
ing Average (EMA) model and Euler Ancestral Sampling
with 50 steps. The whole method is trained for about 5 days
on a single NVIDIA A100, which corresponds to 160,000
iterations. Additional details are in the suppl. material.
4. Experiments
4.1. Evaluation
We compare our method against competing approaches for
generative hair modeling: TECA [54] and Neural Hair-
cut [47]. TECA creates a compositional avatar that includes
separate geometries for hair, body, and cloth using only a
text description. This method represents hair using neu-
ral radiance fields (NeRF) [34] and focuses on the visual
quality of generated avatars, not geometry reconstruction.
Moreover, it takes multiple hours to generate a single sam-
ple using TECA because they rely on Score Distillation
Sampling [38]. In our case, we concentrate on physically
plausible geometry for the hair and require around 4.3 sec-
onds to generate a hairstyle. Neural Haircut focuses on the
reconstruction of realistic 3D hairstyles with a strand-based
representation using monocular video or multi-view images
captured under unconstrained lighting conditions. In this
work, authors exploit a diffusion model to obtain some prior
knowledge for better reconstruction quality. In contrast to
our approach, the quality of the diffusion model is limited
by the amount of data, the size of the model architecture,
and the chosen training strategy. This model is uncondi-
tional, and thus cannot control the generated hairstyles.
Quality of unconditional diffusion. To compare the qual-
ity of the unconditional diffusion model, we re-train Neural
Haircut [47] on the same training data and with the same
scalp parametrization as our method. We evaluate the dis-
tance of the generated hairstyles to the training distribution
using Minimum Matching Distance (MMD) [1] as well as
coverage (Cov) [1] metrics. We use the 1-Nearest Neighbor
accuracy (1-NNA) [30] metric, which is a leave-one-out ac-
5


Prompt: “A woman with afro hairstyle”
Prompt: “A woman with bob hairstyle”
Prompt: “A woman with long wavy hair”
Prompt: “A woman with straight long hair”
TECA
Ours
Figure 4. Comparison. Qualitative comparison of conditional generative models. We show several generations of TECA [54] and our
model. For our results, we visualize the geometry obtained before (shown in pseudocolor) and after upsampling. Our model generates more
diverse samples with higher-quality hairstyles. It is also worth noting that TECA, in some cases, does not follow the input descriptions
well, producing short hair instead of long hair (bottom row). Digital zoom-in is recommended.
Method
MMD↓
COV↑
1-NNA →0.5
Neural Haircut [47]
31507.7
0.18
0.34
Our
21104.9
0.2
0.55
Table 1. Comparison of unconditional diffusion models. Our
method generates samples with better quality and diversity.
curacy of the 1-NN classifier that assesses if two provided
distributions are identical. The best quality is achieved for
values closer to 0.5. Suppose, we have two datasets of gen-
erated and reference hairstyles denoted as Sg and Sr, where
|Sg| = |Sr|. Then, the described metrics are defined as:
MMD(Sg, Sr) =
1
|Sr|
X
y∈Sr
min
x∈Sg
D(x, y)
(5)
COV(Sg, Sr) =
1
|Sr| |{arg min
y∈Sr
D(x, y)|x ∈Sg}|
(6)
1−NNA(Sg, Sr) =
P
x∈Sg I[Nx ∈Sg] + P
y∈Sr I[Ny ∈Sr]
| Sg | + | Sr |
, (7)
where I(·) is an indicator function, NF is the nearest neigh-
bor in set Sr ∪Sg \F and D is the squared distance between
distributions, computed in the latent space of the VAE. In
Table 1, we show the comparison based on these metrics.
Our method generates samples closer to the ground-truth
distribution with higher diversity.
Finally, we conducted a user study. Participants were
presented 40 randomly sampled hairstyle pairs obtained us-
ing Neural Haircut [47] and our method. We collected more
than 1,200 responses on the question “Which hairstyle from
the presented pair is better?”, and ours was preferred in
87.5 % of cases.
Quality of conditional diffusion. We compare the quality
of our conditional generation with TECA [54]. We launch
both of the methods for various prompts with several ran-
dom seeds to obtain the hair volume that follows the de-
sired text input. The qualitative comparison can be seen
in Figure 4. While TECA produces great conditioning re-
sults most of the time, some severe artifacts are noticeable
in the hair region. Furthermore, the diversity of generations
is limited, and we see some failure cases even for simple
prompts like “A woman with straight long hair”. With our
method HAAR, we provide a way to obtain detailed physi-
cally plausible geometry with large variations.
6


Blender (nearest)
Blender (bilinear)
Ours (nearest)
Ours (bilinear)
Ours
Ours w/ noise
Figure 5. Upsampling. Comparison of different upsampling schemes used to interpolate between guiding strands (shown in dark color).
For visualization purposes here we show around 15,000 strands. Blender interpolation is obtained in 3D space, while Ours is computed
in latent space. Using the Nearest Neighbour in both variants produces better accuracy according to the guiding strand geometry (shown
in dark color), but it results in an unrealistic global appearance. The bilinear schemes lead to the penetration of averaged hair strands and
the loss of structure of the original guiding strands. Blending both these methods resolves proposed issues and results in realistic renders.
Adding additional noise in latent space further increases realism and helps to get rid of the grid structure.
Text encoder
CLIP
BLIP
Transf.
Reference
CSIM
0.174
0.189
0.172
0.206
Table 2.
Conditioning.
Ablation on different conditioning
schemes. With BLIP text encoder, we obtain better conditioning
compared to CLIP and trainable Transformer network.
4.2. Ablation study
Conditioning.
The quality of the conditional diffusion
model for hairstyle generation is highly dependent on the
quality of the text encoder network τ(·).
We ablate the
performance of the conditional generation using pre-trained
and frozen encoders, such as CLIP [41], BLIP [22] as well
as a trained transformer network [50] implemented on top
of a pre-trained BertTokenizer [8]. For more details on the
architecture, please refer to the supplemental material. The
intuition behind training additional networks for text encod-
ing is that the quality of pre-trained encoders may be limited
for a particular task (for example some specific hairstyle
types), which results in wrong correlations between words
and deteriorates the quality of the diffusion model.
We evaluate the performance using semantic matching
between text and generated 3D hairstyles. Specifically, we
use CLIP [41] and compute the cosine distance between im-
ages and their respective text prompts. To do that, we gen-
erate 100 hairstyles for 10 different prompts and then render
from a frontal view using Blender [7]. Table 2 shows that
the BLIP text encoder is providing the most effective con-
ditioning. To show the upper-bound quality of this metric
(’reference’), we calculate the CSIM on our ground-truth
dataset with prompts obtained via VQA.
Upsampling scheme. We ablate the performance of dif-
ferent upsampling schemes needed to obtain a full hairstyle
from a set of guiding strands, which can be seen in Figure 5.
There is no one-to-one correspondence and during interpo-
lation, a lot of artifacts can occur. The most common artifact
is a visible grid structure which appears when using a Near-
est Neighbour (NN) strategy. Bilinear interpolation leads to
scalp penetrations due to averaging the nearest strands on
top of the head, and it deteriorates the local shape of curls.
The computer graphics engines, such as Blender [7] and
Maya [3], either do not provide enough control or require
a lot of manual effort in setting up the optimal parameters
for each hairstyle separately. We find that the combination
of NN and Bilinear using our proposed scheme leads to the
best-looking results of renders. Furthermore, adding noise
in the latent space results in more realistic hairstyles. Note,
for visualization we show an example with a reduced den-
sity of around 15,000 strands; increasing it leads to less bald
regions, especially, in the region of a partition.
4.3. Hairstyle editing
Similar to Imagic [17], we do text-based hairstyle editing,
see Figure 6. Given an input hairstyle and a target text that
corresponds to the desired prompt, we edit the hairstyle in a
way that it corresponds to the prompt while preserving the
details of the input hairstyle. To do that we first do textual
inversion of the input hairstyle. We obtain etgt that corre-
sponds to the target prompt P. After optimizing it with a
fixed diffusion model Dθ using a reconstruction loss, we
acquire eopt. Conditioning on the obtained text embedding
eopt does not lead to the same target hairstyle. So, to pro-
7


Input Image
eopt
0.25
0.5
0.75
“Short straight”
Figure 6. Hairstyle editing. Similar to Imagic [17], we edit the input image using a text prompt. We provide editing results without
additionally tuning the diffusion model (first two rows) and with it (second two rows). Finetuning the diffusion model results in smoother
editing and better preservation of input hairstyle.
Figure 7. Limitations. Our failure cases include penetration into
the scalp region (left), which in principle can be resolved in a post-
processing step. Additionally, for the afro hairstyles (right), the
degree of strands’ curliness needs to be increased.
vide a smooth transition, we freeze eopt and fine-tune Dθ.
Finally, we linearly interpolate between etgt and eopt. For
more information, please refer to the supplemental material.
4.4. Limitations
The quality of generated hairstyles is limited by the vari-
ety and quality of our dataset, in terms of both the diversity
of geometry assets and the accuracy of textual annotations.
The main failure cases include the generation of hairstyles
with scalp interpenetrations and lack of curliness for some
extreme hairstyles, see Figure 7. In theory, these limitations
can be addressed with a dataset that contains more diverse
samples of curly hairstyles, as well as human-made anno-
tations. Especially, when used in a physics simulation, the
interpenetrations can be resolved in a postprocessing step.
Another limitation of our method is that we only consider
geometry, we do not generate the hair color and texture
which would be an interesting direction for future work.
5. Conclusion
We have presented HAAR, the first method that is able to
conditionally generate realistic strand-based hairstyles us-
ing textual hairstyle descriptions as input. Not only can such
a system accelerate hairstyle creation in computer graph-
ics engines, but it also bridges the gap between computer
graphics and computer vision. For computer graphics, gen-
erated hairstyles could be easily incorporated into tools like
Blender for hair editing and physics-based animation. For
computer vision, our system can be used as a strong prior
for the generation of avatars or to create synthetic training
data of realistic hairstyles. While being limited by data, we
think that this method is a first step in the direction of con-
trollable and automatic hairstyle generation.
Acknowledgements
Vanessa Sklyarova was supported by the Max Planck ETH
Center for Learning Systems. Egor Zakharov’s work was
funded by the “AI-PERCEIVE” ERC Consolidator Grant,
2021. We sincerely thank Giorgio Becherini for rendering
8


hairstyles and Joachim Tesch for realistic hair simulations.
Also, we thank Yao Feng and Balamurugan Thambiraja for
their help during the project and Hao Zhang for aiding us
with the TECA comparison.
Disclosure.
MJB has received research gift funds from
Adobe, Intel, Nvidia, Meta/Facebook, and Amazon. MJB
has financial interests in Amazon, Datagen Technologies,
and Meshcapade GmbH. While MJB is a consultant for
Meshcapade, his research in this project was performed
solely at, and funded solely by, the Max Planck Society.
References
[1] Panos Achlioptas, Olga Diamanti, Ioannis Mitliagkas, and
Leonidas Guibas. Learning representations and generative
models for 3D point clouds. In Proceedings of the 35th In-
ternational Conference on Machine Learning, pages 40–49.
PMLR, 2018. 5
[2] Shivangi Aneja, Justus Thies, Angela Dai, and Matthias
Nießner.
ClipFace: Text-guided Editing of Textured 3D
Morphable Models.
In ArXiv preprint arXiv:2212.01406,
2022. 3
[3] Autodesk, INC. Maya. 1, 2, 3, 4, 7
[4] Yukang Cao, Yan-Pei Cao, Kai Han, Ying Shan, and Kwan-
Yee K Wong. Dreamavatar: Text-and-shape guided 3d hu-
man avatar generation via diffusion models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2304.00916, 2023. 3
[5] Rui Chen, Yongwei Chen, Ningxin Jiao, and Kui Jia. Fan-
tasia3d: Disentangling geometry and appearance for high-
quality text-to-3d content creation.
In Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision
(ICCV), 2023. 2
[6] Zilong Chen, Feng Wang, and Huaping Liu. Text-to-3d using
gaussian splatting, 2023. 2
[7] Blender Online Community. Blender - a 3D modelling and
rendering package. Blender Foundation, Stichting Blender
Foundation, Amsterdam, 2023. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 7, 12
[8] Jacob Devlin, Ming-Wei Chang, Kenton Lee, and Kristina
Toutanova. Bert: Pre-training of deep bidirectional trans-
formers for language understanding.
In North American
Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics,
2019. 7, 11
[9] Epic Games. Unreal engine. 1, 2, 3, 4, 13
[10] Tiankai Hang, Shuyang Gu, Chen Li, Jianmin Bao, Dong
Chen, Han Hu, Xin Geng, and Baining Guo. Efficient diffu-
sion training via min-snr weighting strategy. In Proceedings
of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vi-
sion (ICCV), pages 7441–7451, 2023. 5
[11] Jonathan Ho and Tim Salimans.
Classifier-free diffusion
guidance. In NeurIPS 2021 Workshop on Deep Generative
Models and Downstream Applications, 2021. 11
[12] Fangzhou Hong, Mingyuan Zhang, Liang Pan, Zhongang
Cai, Lei Yang, and Ziwei Liu. Avatarclip: Zero-shot text-
driven generation and animation of 3d avatars. ACM Trans-
actions on Graphics (TOG), 41(4):1–19, 2022. 3
[13] Liwen Hu, Chongyang Ma, Linjie Luo, and Hao Li. Single-
view hair modeling using a hairstyle database. ACM Trans-
actions on Graphics (TOG), 34:1 – 9, 2015. 3, 4
[14] Yangyi Huang, Hongwei Yi, Yuliang Xiu, Tingting Liao, Ji-
axiang Tang, Deng Cai, and Justus Thies. TeCH: Text-guided
Reconstruction of Lifelike Clothed Humans. In International
Conference on 3D Vision (3DV), 2024. 2, 3
[15] Phillip Isola, Jun-Yan Zhu, Tinghui Zhou, and Alexei A
Efros. Image-to-image translation with conditional adver-
sarial networks. CVPR, 2017. 3
[16] Tero Karras, Miika Aittala, Timo Aila, and Samuli Laine.
Elucidating the design space of diffusion-based generative
models. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Sys-
tems (NeurIPS), 2022. 3, 4, 11
[17] Bahjat Kawar, Shiran Zada, Oran Lang, Omer Tov, Huiwen
Chang, Tali Dekel, Inbar Mosseri, and Michal Irani. Imagic:
Text-based real image editing with diffusion models. In Con-
ference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition 2023,
2023. 7, 8
[18] Diederik P Kingma and Max Welling. Auto-encoding varia-
tional bayes, 2022. 3
[19] Nikos Kolotouros, Thiemo Alldieck, Andrei Zanfir, Ed-
uard Gabriel Bazavan, Mihai Fieraru, and Cristian Sminchis-
escu. Dreamhuman: Animatable 3d avatars from text. 2023.
3
[20] Zhiyi Kuang, Yiyang Chen, Hongbo Fu, Kun Zhou, and
Youyi Zheng.
Deepmvshair:
Deep hair modeling from
sparse views.
SIGGRAPH Asia 2022 Conference Papers,
2022. 3
[21] Dongxu Li, Junnan Li, Hung Le, Guangsen Wang, Silvio
Savarese, and Steven C.H. Hoi. LAVIS: A one-stop library
for language-vision intelligence. In Proceedings of the 61st
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Lin-
guistics (Volume 3: System Demonstrations), pages 31–41,
Toronto, Canada, 2023. Association for Computational Lin-
guistics. 11
[22] Junnan Li, Dongxu Li, Caiming Xiong, and Steven Hoi.
Blip: Bootstrapping language-image pre-training for unified
vision-language understanding and generation.
In ICML,
2022. 2, 3, 5, 7, 11
[23] Tianye Li, Timo Bolkart, Michael. J. Black, Hao Li, and
Javier Romero. Learning a model of facial shape and ex-
pression from 4D scans. ACM Transactions on Graphics,
(Proc. SIGGRAPH Asia), 36(6):194:1–194:17, 2017. 2
[24] Tingting Liao, Hongwei Yi, Yuliang Xiu, Jiaxiang Tang,
Yangyi Huang, Justus Thies, and Michael J Black. Tada!
text to animatable digital avatars. ArXiv, 2023. 3
[25] Chen-Hsuan Lin, Jun Gao, Luming Tang, Towaki Takikawa,
Xiaohui Zeng, Xun Huang, Karsten Kreis, Sanja Fidler,
Ming-Yu Liu, and Tsung-Yi Lin. Magic3d: High-resolution
text-to-3d content creation. In IEEE Conference on Com-
puter Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2023. 2
[26] Haotian Liu, Chunyuan Li, Yuheng Li, and Yong Jae Lee.
Improved baselines with visual instruction tuning, 2023. 2,
4, 5, 11
[27] Haotian Liu, Chunyuan Li, Qingyang Wu, and Yong Jae Lee.
Visual instruction tuning. In NeurIPS, 2023. 2, 5, 11
9


[28] Minghua Liu, Ruoxi Shi, Linghao Chen, Zhuoyang Zhang,
Chao Xu, Hansheng Chen, Chong Zeng, Jiayuan Gu, and
Hao Su. One-2-3-45++: Fast single image to 3d objects with
consistent multi-view generation and 3d diffusion, 2023. 2
[29] Ruoshi Liu, Rundi Wu, Basile Van Hoorick, Pavel Tok-
makov, Sergey Zakharov, and Carl Vondrick. Zero-1-to-3:
Zero-shot one image to 3d object, 2023. 2
[30] David Lopez-Paz and Maxime Oquab. Revisiting classifier
two-sample tests. In International Conference on Learning
Representations, 2017. 5
[31] Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter.
Decoupled weight de-
cay regularization. In International Conference on Learning
Representations, 2017. 11, 12
[32] Luke Melas-Kyriazi, Christian Rupprecht, Iro Laina, and
Andrea Vedaldi. Realfusion: 360 reconstruction of any ob-
ject from a single image. In CVPR, 2023. 2
[33] Oscar Michel, Roi Bar-On, Richard Liu, Sagie Benaim, and
Rana Hanocka. Text2mesh: Text-driven neural stylization
for meshes. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.03221, 2021. 3
[34] Ben Mildenhall, Pratul P. Srinivasan, Matthew Tancik,
Jonathan T. Barron, Ravi Ramamoorthi, and Ren Ng. Nerf:
Representing scenes as neural radiance fields for view syn-
thesis. In ECCV, 2020. 2, 3, 5
[35] Giljoo Nam, Chenglei Wu, Min H. Kim, and Yaser Sheikh.
Strand-accurate multi-view hair capture.
2019 IEEE/CVF
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
(CVPR), pages 155–164, 2019. 3
[36] ChatGPT. OpenAI, 2023. 5, 13, 16
[37] Sylvain Paris, H´ector M. Brice˜no, and Franc¸ois X. Sillion.
Capture of hair geometry from multiple images. ACM SIG-
GRAPH 2004 Papers, 2004. 3
[38] Ben Poole, Ajay Jain, Jonathan T. Barron, and Ben Milden-
hall. Dreamfusion: Text-to-3d using 2d diffusion. arXiv,
2022. 2, 3, 5
[39] Guocheng Qian, Jinjie Mai, Abdullah Hamdi, Jian Ren,
Aliaksandr Siarohin, Bing Li, Hsin-Ying Lee, Ivan Sko-
rokhodov, Peter Wonka, Sergey Tulyakov, and Bernard
Ghanem. Magic123: One image to high-quality 3d object
generation using both 2d and 3d diffusion priors.
arXiv
preprint arXiv:2306.17843, 2023. 2
[40] Aditya Ramesh, Mikhail Pavlov, Gabriel Goh, Scott Gray,
Chelsea Voss, Alec Radford, Mark Chen, and Ilya Sutskever.
Zero-shot text-to-image generation. In International Confer-
ence on Machine Learning, pages 8821–8831. PMLR, 2021.
3
[41] Aditya Ramesh, Prafulla Dhariwal, Alex Nichol, Casey Chu,
and Mark Chen. Hierarchical text-conditional image gener-
ation with clip latents. ArXiv, abs/2204.06125, 2022. 3, 7,
11
[42] Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz,
Patrick Esser, and Bj¨orn Ommer.
High-resolution image
synthesis with latent diffusion models.
In Proceedings of
the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern
recognition, pages 10684–10695, 2022. 2, 3, 11
[43] Radu Alexandru Rosu, Shunsuke Saito, Ziyan Wang, Chen-
glei Wu, Sven Behnke, and Giljoo Nam.
Neural strands:
Learning hair geometry and appearance from multi-view im-
ages. European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV),
2022. 3
[44] Chitwan Saharia, William Chan, Saurabh Saxena, Lala
Li, Jay Whang, Emily Denton, Seyed Kamyar Seyed
Ghasemipour, Burcu Karagol Ayan, S. Sara Mahdavi,
Rapha Gontijo Lopes, Tim Salimans, Jonathan Ho, David J
Fleet, and Mohammad Norouzi. Photorealistic text-to-image
diffusion models with deep language understanding. 2022. 3
[45] Shunsuke Saito,
Liwen Hu,
Chongyang Ma,
Hikaru
Ibayashi, Linjie Luo, and Hao Li. 3d hair synthesis using
volumetric variational autoencoders. ACM Transactions on
Graphics (TOG), 37:1 – 12, 2018. 3
[46] Yuefan Shen, Shunsuke Saito, Ziyan Wang, Olivier Maury,
Chenglei Wu, Jessica Hodgins, Youyi Zheng, and Giljoo
Nam. Ct2hair: High-fidelity 3d hair modeling using com-
puted tomography. ACM Transactions on Graphics, 42(4):
1–13, 2023. 4
[47] Vanessa Sklyarova, Jenya Chelishev, Andreea Dogaru, Igor
Medvedev, Victor Lempitsky, and Egor Zakharov. Neural
haircut: Prior-guided strand-based hair reconstruction.
In
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on
Computer Vision (ICCV), pages 19762–19773, 2023. 2, 3, 5,
6
[48] Jiaxiang Tang, Jiawei Ren, Hang Zhou, Ziwei Liu, and Gang
Zeng. Dreamgaussian: Generative gaussian splatting for effi-
cient 3d content creation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.16653,
2023. 2
[49] Junshu Tang, Tengfei Wang, Bo Zhang, Ting Zhang, Ran Yi,
Lizhuang Ma, and Dong Chen. Make-it-3d: High-fidelity
3d creation from a single image with diffusion prior. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2303.14184, 2023. 2
[50] Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszko-
reit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Ł ukasz Kaiser, and Illia
Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. In Advances in Neu-
ral Information Processing Systems. Curran Associates, Inc.,
2017. 7, 11
[51] Thomas Wolf, Lysandre Debut, Victor Sanh, Julien Chau-
mond, Clement Delangue, Anthony Moi, Pierric Cistac, Tim
Rault, R´emi Louf, Morgan Funtowicz, Joe Davison, Sam
Shleifer, Patrick von Platen, Clara Ma, Yacine Jernite, Julien
Plu, Canwen Xu, Teven Le Scao, Sylvain Gugger, Mariama
Drame, Quentin Lhoest, and Alexander M. Rush.
Trans-
formers: State-of-the-art natural language processing.
In
Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods
in Natural Language Processing: System Demonstrations,
pages 38–45, Online, 2020. Association for Computational
Linguistics. 11
[52] Keyu Wu, Yifan Ye, Lingchen Yang, Hongbo Fu, Kun Zhou,
and Youyi Zheng.
Neuralhdhair: Automatic high-fidelity
hair modeling from a single image using implicit neural
representations. 2022 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pages 1516–1525,
2022. 3
[53] Lingchen Yang, Zefeng Shi, Youyi Zheng, and Kun Zhou.
Dynamic hair modeling from monocular videos using deep
neural networks. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG), 38:
1 – 12, 2019. 3
10
