Title: Next3d: Generative neural texture rasterization for 3d-aware head avatars

Next3D: Generative Neural Texture Rasterization for 3D-Aware Head Avatars
Jingxiang Sun1
Xuan Wang2
Lizhen Wang1
Xiaoyu Li3
Yong Zhang3
Hongwen Zhang1
Yebin Liu1
1Tsinghua University
2Ant Group
3Tencent AI Lab
Figure 1. Our 3D GAN synthesizes generative, high-quality, and 3D-consistent facial avatars from unstructured 2D images. Unlike current
animatable 3D GANs that only modify yaw-pitch head poses and facial expressions, our approach enables ﬁne-grained control over full-
head rotations, facial expressions, eye blinks, and gaze directions with strict 3D consistency and a high level of photorealism. Our approach
also provides strong 3D priors for downstream tasks such as 3D-aware stylization.
Abstract
3D-aware generative adversarial networks (GANs) syn-
thesize high-ﬁdelity and multi-view-consistent facial images
using only collections of single-view 2D imagery. Towards
ﬁne-grained control over facial attributes, recent efforts in-
corporate 3D Morphable Face Model (3DMM) to describe
deformation in generative radiance ﬁelds either explicitly
or implicitly. Explicit methods provide ﬁne-grained expres-
sion control but cannot handle topological changes caused
by hair and accessories, while implicit ones can model var-
ied topologies but have limited generalization caused by the
unconstrained deformation ﬁelds. We propose a novel 3D
GAN framework for unsupervised learning of generative,
high-quality and 3D-consistent facial avatars from unstruc-
tured 2D images. To achieve both deformation accuracy
and topological ﬂexibility, we propose a 3D representation
called Generative Texture-Rasterized Tri-planes. The pro-
posed representation learns Generative Neural Textures on
top of parametric mesh templates and then projects them
into three orthogonal-viewed feature planes through raster-
ization, forming a tri-plane feature representation for vol-
ume rendering. In this way, we combine both ﬁne-grained
expression control of mesh-guided explicit deformation and
the ﬂexibility of implicit volumetric representation. We fur-
ther propose speciﬁc modules for modeling mouth interior
which is not taken into account by 3DMM. Our method
demonstrates state-of-the-art 3D-aware synthesis quality
and animation ability through extensive experiments. Fur-
thermore, serving as 3D prior, our animatable 3D repre-
sentation boosts multiple applications including one-shot
facial avatars and 3D-aware stylization.
1. Introduction
Animatable portrait synthesis is essential for movie post-
production, visual effects, augmented reality (AR), and vir-
tual reality (VR) telepresence applications. Efﬁcient ani-
matable portrait generators should be capable of synthesiz-
1
arXiv:2211.11208v2  [cs.CV]  13 Mar 2023


ing diverse high-ﬁdelity portraits with full control of the
rigid head pose, facial expressions and gaze directions at
a ﬁne-grained level. The main challenges of this task lie
in how to model accurate deformation and preserve iden-
tity through animation in the generative setting, i.e. training
with only unstructured corpus of 2D images.
Several 2D generative models perform image anima-
tion by incorporating the 3D Morphable Face Models
(3DMM) [4] into the portrait synthesis [13, 16, 35, 52, 62,
65,70,73]. These 2D-based methods achieve photorealism
but suffer from shape distortion during large motion due to
a lack of geometry constraints. Towards better view con-
sistency, many recent efforts incorporate 3DMM with 3D
GANs, learning to synthesize animatable and 3D consis-
tent portraits from only 2D image collections in an unsu-
pervised manner [3, 30, 39, 44, 60, 61, 68, 74]. Bergman et
al. [3] propose an explicit surface-driven deformation ﬁeld
for warping radiance ﬁelds. While modeling accurate facial
deformation, it cannot handle topological changes caused
by non-facial components, e.g.
hair, glasses, and other
accessories. AnifaceGAN [68] builds an implicit 3DMM-
conditioned deformation ﬁeld and constrains animation ac-
curacy by imitation learning. It achieves smooth animation
on interpolated expressions, however, struggles to generate
reasonable extrapolation due to the under-constrained de-
formation ﬁeld. Therefore, The key challenge of this task is
modeling deformation in the 3D generative setting for ani-
mation accuracy and topological ﬂexibility.
In this paper, we propose a novel 3D GAN framework
for unsupervised learning of generative, high-quality, and
3D-consistent facial avatars from unstructured 2D images.
Our model splits the whole head into dynamic and static
parts, and models them respectively. For dynamic parts, the
key insight is to combine both ﬁne-grained expression con-
trol of mesh-guided explicit deformation and ﬂexibility of
implicit volumetric representation. To this end, we propose
a novel representation, Generative Texture-Rasterized Tri-
planes, which learns the facial deformation through Gen-
erative Neural Textures on top of a parametric template
mesh and samples them into three orthogonal-viewed and
axis-aligned feature planes through standard rasterization,
forming a tri-plane feature representation.
Such texture-
rasterized tri-planes re-form high-dimensional dynamic sur-
face features in a volumetric representation for efﬁcient vol-
ume rendering and thus inherit both the accurate control of
the mesh-driven deformation and the expressiveness of vol-
umetric representations. Furthermore, we represent static
components (body, hair, background, etc.) by another tri-
plane branch, and integrate both through alpha blending.
Another key insight of our method is to model the mouth
interior which is not taken into account by 3DMM. Mouth
interior is crucial for animation quality but often ignored
by prior arts. We propose an efﬁcient teeth synthesis mod-
ule, formed as a style-modulated UNet, to complete the in-
ner mouth features missed by the template mesh. To fur-
ther regularize the deformation accuracy, we introduce a
deformation-aware discriminator which takes as input syn-
thetic renderings, encouraging the alignment of the ﬁnal
outputs with the 2D projection of the expected deformation.
To summarize, the contributions of our approach are:
• We present an animatable 3D-aware GAN framework
for photorealistic portrait synthesis with ﬁne-grained
animation, including expressions, eye blinks, gaze di-
rection and full head poses.
• We propose Generative Texture-Rasterized Triplanes,
an efﬁcient deformable 3D representation that inherits
both ﬁne-grained expression control of mesh-guided
explicit deformation and ﬂexibility of implicit volu-
metric representation. To our knowledge, we are the
ﬁrst method to incorporate Neural Textures into ani-
matable 3D-aware synthesis.
• Our learned generative animatable 3D representation
can serve as a strong 3D prior and boost the down-
stream application of 3D-aware one-shot facial avatars.
Our model also pushes the frontier of 3D stylization
with high-quality out-of-domain facial avatars.
2. Related Work
Generative 3D-aware Image Synthesis. Generative adver-
sarial networks [24] have achieved photorealistic synthesis
in 2D domain. Building on the success of 2D GANs, many
efforts have lifted the image synthesis into 3D with explicit
view control. Early voxel-based approaches [19,28,41,42,
67,82] adopt the 3D CNN generators whose heavy compu-
tational burden limits the high-resolution image synthesis.
Recent works incorporate more efﬁcient neural scene rep-
resentations, such as fully implicit networks [6, 8–10, 14,
47,54,57,81], sparse voxel grids [55], multiple planes [79]
or a combination of low-resolution feature volume and 2D
super-resolution [7, 27, 43, 46, 71, 72, 76, 78]. We leverage
the tri-plane representation proposed in [7] and endow it
with animation ability by the orthogonal-rasterized Gener-
ative Neural Textures.
Some other current works [3,30,36,44,58,59,61,68,77,
83] focus on the editability of 3D-aware generative models.
FENeRF [59] and IDE-3D [58] perform semantic-guided
3D face editing by incorporating semantic-aware radiance
ﬁelds and GAN inversion. However, they cannot produce
continuous and stable editing on videos. Other methods [3,
30,44,61,68] employ 3D priors to achieve animatable image
synthesis and the main differences lie on the deformation
strategies including linear blend skinning [30, 44], surface-
driven deformation [3], 3DMM-guided latent decomposi-
tion [61] and neural deformation ﬁelds [68].
These ap-
proaches either don’t allow for topology changes or need
2


Figure 2. Our 3D GAN framework consists of two tri-plane branches Tuv and Tstatic modeling dynamic and static components. Tuv
is formed by the orthogonal rasterized Generative Neural Textures which are synthesized by a StyleGAN generator, Gtexture, on top
of deformable template mesh. Tstatic is synthesized by another StyleGAN generator, Gstatic. The mouth synthesis module, Gteeth, is
presented for completing mouth interior. Blended triplanes are incorporated with hybrid neural renderer consisting of volume rendering
and a super-resolution module Gsuperres.. For discrimination, synthetic renderings Isynthetic is taken into the dual discriminator Ddual.
elaborate loss design to ensure the accuracy of deformation.
On the contrary, our approach naturally achieves accurate
animation with explicit mesh guidance and further allow
for topology changes by adapting surface deformation into
a continuous volumetric representation.
Facial animation with 3D morphable face models. Blanz
et al. [4] model facial texture and shape as vector spaces,
known as the 3D Morphable Model (3DMM). Extensions
of 3DMM, such as full-head PCA models [12, 51], blend-
shape models [38], are extensively studied and widely used
in facial animation tasks [23,65]. Beneﬁting from 3DMM,
these methods can model the deformation of facial parts ac-
curately and continuously, nevertheless, struggle to repre-
sent non-facial areas missed by 3DMM, e.g. hair, teeth,
eyes, and body. Moreover, these methods are prone to lack-
ing facial details. To ﬁll the missing areas and complete
more realistic facial details, later works [13, 16, 18, 22, 35,
52, 62, 64, 70] apply learned approaches on top of 3DMM
renderings.
DiscoFaceGAN [13] maps 3DMM parame-
ters into the latent space and decouple them by imitative-
contrastive learning. Though efﬁcient and photorealistic an-
imation is achieved, these 2D methods don’t model 3D ge-
ometry and thus cannot remain strict 3D consistency with
large head pose changes. For strict 3D consistency, recent
efforts [1,20,25,75,80] incorporate 3DMM into volumetric
representations [31,32,40,49,56] to achieve view-consistent
facial animation. Furthermore, volumetric representations
enable the modeling of thin structures such as hair, and
also mouth interior thanks to its spatial continuity. While
3DMM have been adopted to animate radiance ﬁelds for
single-scene scenarios, it is challenging to adapt to the gen-
erative setting with the absence of groundtruth supervision.
Neural scene representations. The neural scene represen-
tations can be roughly categorized into implicit and explicit
surface representations and volumetric representations [63].
The surface can be represented explicitly by point clouds
[37, 50], meshes [2, 5, 45, 64], or deﬁned implicitly as a
zero level-set of a function [11,48,69], like signed distance
function, which can be approximated by coordinate-based
multi-layer perceptrons (MLPs). On the contrary, volumet-
ric representations [32, 40, 49, 56] store volumetric prop-
erties (occupancies, radiance, colors, etc.) instead of the
surface of an object. These properties can be stored in ex-
plicit voxel grids [32,49,56] or the weights of a neural net-
work implicitly [40]. In this work, we propose a hybrid
surface–volumetric representation. Speciﬁcally, we learn
the deformable surface radiance by neural textures [26,64]
on top of the template mesh and rasterize it into three
orthogonal-viewed feature planes. Then, the planes are re-
shaped to a tri-plane representation with decoding into neu-
ral radiance ﬁelds for volume rendering.
3. Approach
We present an animatable 3D-aware facial generator that
equips with ﬁne-grained expression and pose control, pho-
torealistic rendering quality, and high-quality underlying
geometry. The proposed method models dynamic and static
components by two independent tri-plane branches. Specif-
ically, we propose Generative Texture-rasterized Tri-planes
for modeling dynamic facial parts (Sec. 3.1). Furthermore,
we propose an efﬁcient mouth synthesis module to com-
plete the mouth interior that is not included in 3DMM
(Sec. 3.2). We further adopt another tri-plane branch for the
static components (Sec. 3.3). Both tri-planes are blended to-
gether for hybrid neural rendering (Sec. 3.4). We introduce
an deformation-aware discriminator (Sec. 3.5) and illustrate
3


the training objectives in Sec. 3.6.
3.1. Generative texture-rasterized tri-planes
EG3D [7] presents an efﬁcient tri-plane-based hybrid
3D representation to synthesize high-resolution images with
multi-view consistency. Nonetheless, EG3D lacks control
over facial deformations and thus cannot be directly applied
to animation tasks. To this end, we leverage Neural tex-
tures [64] to represent deformable facial parts. In general,
Neural Textures are a set of learned high-dimensional fea-
ture maps that can be interpreted by a neural renderer. We
extend it to our generative setting and synthesize the neural
textures through a StyleGAN2 CNN generator Gtexture. As
shown in Fig. 2, we ﬁrst sample a latent code z and map it
into an intermediate latent space by the mapping network.
Our texture generator architecture closely follows Style-
GAN2 backbone [34], except producing a 256 × 256 × 32
neural texture map, T, instead of a three-channel RGB
image. Storing a high-dimensional learned feature vector
per texel, T can be rasterized to a view-dependent screen-
space feature map given a mesh with uv-texture parame-
terization and a target view as input. In our case, we use
the FLAME template [38] to provide a coarse mesh that
can be driven by deformation parameters. Given the pre-
designed texture mapping function, we employ the stan-
dard graphics pipeline to rasterize the neural textures from
the texture space into the screen space based on the tem-
plate mesh. We choose Neural Textures as the deforma-
tion method for two reasons. First, compared with other ex-
plicit deformation (e.g. linear blend skinning and surface-
driven deformation) highly dependent on the accurate un-
derlying geometry, Neural Textures embed high-level fea-
tures which compensate the imperfect geometry and thus
are more suitable for our settings where template meshes
are not accurate. Furthermore, unlike implicit deformation
methods [13,61,68], our explicit mesh-guided deformation
alleviates the requirement of elaborate imitation learning
while gain better expression generalization (Fig. 4).
Neural Textures encode surface deformation accurately
with mesh guidance but lack generalization to 3D points far
from surface. Besides, it also doesn’t allow for topologi-
cal changes. To this end, we propose Generative Texture-
Rasterized Tri-planes, Tuv which reshapes the rasterized
textures into a tri-plane representation. Therefore, we can
adapt such surface deformation into a continuous volume.
Speciﬁcally, we rasterize neural textures based on the tem-
plate mesh into three orthogonal views and place them in
three axis-aligned feature planes. In practice, considering
the zygomorphy, the rasterization is applied at both the left
and right views and the rasterized features are concatenated
for one single plane by summation. In this way, Our hybrid
surface-volumetric representation inherits the best of both
worlds: accurate mesh-guided facial deformation of Neu-
ral Textures and the continuity and topological ﬂexibility of
volumetric representations. See Fig. 5 for the topological-
aware animation of portraits with glasses.
3.2. Mouth synthesis module
Figure 3. The teeth synthesis module consists of a teeth complet-
ing module and a neural blending module. The teeth competing
module produces mouth interior conditioned on multi-scale teeth
exterior features and latent codes w.
Since the FLAME template doesn’t contain inner mouth,
we propose a teeth synthesis module, Gteeth, to complete
the missing teeth features in Tuv. As shown in Fig. 3, for
each feature plane of Tuv, we crop the teeth area by the
expanded landmarks and resize it into 64 × 64. Then, the
stacked mouth features are processed by Gteeth which em-
ploys a style-modulated UNet [66]. The downsampling pro-
cess of Gteeth encodes fteeth into multi-scale feature maps
which serve as content conditions for the following Style-
GAN layers.
The output teeth features f
′
teeth are trans-
formed inversely and concatenated with the feature planes
of Tuv. To eliminate the texture ﬂickering of mouth bound-
ary, we further feed Tuv into a shallow-UNet-based neural
blending module and obtain T
′
uv. We conduct a series of
ablation studies and prove that the proposed teeth synthe-
sis module brings a remarkable improvement on both the
animation accuracy and synthesis quality (Sec. 4.2).
3.3. Modeling static components
The generative texture-rasterized tri-planes manage to
model dynamic faces varying expressions and shapes,
though, it is challenging to synthesize static parts like di-
verse haircut, background and upper body which are not in-
cluded in the FLAME template. To this end, we model these
parts by another tri-plane branch, Tstatic, which is gener-
ated by a StyleGAN2 CNN generator Gstatic sharing the
same latent code with Gtexture. The plane features of T
′
uv
and Tstatic are blended on each plane by the alpha masks
rendered by rasterization. Such design not only beneﬁts the
modeling of various-styled static components but also en-
forces their consistency during facial animations.
4


3.4. Neural rendering
Given the blended tri-planes, for any point in the 3D
space, we project it into each plane and sample the features
bi-linearly. Then, the sampled features are aggregated by
summation and decoded into volume density σ and feature
f by a lightweight decoder. Similar to [7,58], the decoder is
a single hidden layered multi-layer perceptron (MLP) with
softplus activation. The volume rendering is employed to
accumulate σ and f along the rays cast through each pixel
to compute a 2D feature image If. Similar to [7,27,46], we
leverage a 2D super-resolution module Gsuperres. to inter-
pret the feature image into RGB image IRGB with higher
resolution. The super-resolution module consists of three
StyleGAN2 synthesis blocks and the noise input is removed
for alleviating texture ﬂickers. In our case, If and IRGB are
set to 64 × 64 and 512 × 512, respectively.
3.5. Deformation-aware discriminator
To learn the unsupervised 3D representations, we adopt
a 2D convolutional discriminator D to critique the render-
ings. Inspired by [7], we regularize the ﬁrst three channels
of If as low-resolution RGB image, which is concatenated
with IRGB as the input for the discriminator. However, the
discrimination with only image input can only ensure that
the deformed images are always in a correct distribution in-
stead of matching the expected deformations. Therefore, we
make the discriminator aware of the expression and shape
under which the generated image are deformed. For the
same purpose, GNARF [3] conditions the discriminator on
the FLAME parameters by concatenating them as the in-
put to the mapping network. However, we ﬁnd empirically
that such a conditioning method leads to training instabil-
ity, consistent with [3]. Instead, we re-render the template
mesh under the rendered pose to get the synthetic rendering
Isynthetic and feed it into Ddual along with image pairs.
Here, we adopt correspondence images inspired by [35].
Such concatenation encourages the ﬁnal output to align with
the synthetic rendering and learn the expected deformation.
3.6. Training objectives
During training, we use the non-saturating GAN loss
with R1 regularization.
Moreover, we adopt the density
regularization proposed in EG3D [7]. Therefore, the total
learning objective is:
LDdual,G =Ez∼pz,ϵ∼pϵ[f(Ddual(G(z, ϵ)))]+
EIr∼pIr [f(−Ddual(Ir)+
λ∥▽Ddual(Ir)∥2],
(1)
Ldensity =
X
xs∈S∥d(xs) −d(xs + ϵ)∥2,
(2)
Ltotal =LDdual,G + λdensityLdensity,
(3)
where Ir is the combination of real images, blurred real
images, and the corresponding synthetic renderings, which
are sampled from the training set with distribution pI.
We adopt many training hyperparameters from EG3D and
StyleGAN2 (learning rates of generator and discriminator,
batch size, R1 regularization, etc.).
We train our model
based on the pretrained model of EG3D [7] and continue
to train on 4 3090 GPUs for roughly 4 days. Please refer to
the supplemental material for the implementation details.
4. Experiments
In this section, we ﬁrst show qualitative and quantitative
comparisons to state-of-the-art 2D / 3D animatable genera-
tive facial models (Sec. 4.1), and then discuss the conducted
ablation studies of our design choices (Sec. 4.2). Further-
more, we show various applications combining our efﬁcient
3D representation with GAN technologies such as GAN in-
version and style transfer (Sec. 4.3).
Datasets. We train and test our methods on FFHQ [33].
We augment FFHQ with horizontal ﬂips and use an off-the-
shelf pose estimator [15] to label images with the approxi-
mated camera extrinsic parameters and constant intrinsics.
To support full pose animation, in-plane (roll) rotation is
also considered. Furthermore, we use DECA [17] to esti-
mate the FLAME parameters of facial identity β ∈R100,
jaw pose θjaw ∈R3 and expression ψ ∈R50.
Since
DECA doesn’t account for eyeball movement, we addition-
ally adopt an efﬁcient facial detector 1 to detect 2D land-
marks of irises and optimize eye poses θeye ∈R6 by min-
imizing the re-projection errors. Based on these FLAME
parameters, we produce a template mesh with 5023 vertices
and 9976 faces to drive facial deformations.
4.1. Comparisons
Baselines. We compare our method against two state-of-
the-art methods for animatable 3D-aware image synthesis:
3DFaceShop [61], and AniFaceGAN [68]. Besides, we also
select DiscoFaceGAN [13] as a baseline, which generates
animatable 2D portraits conditioned on 3DMM parameters.
Qualitative comparison. Fig. 4 provides a qualitative com-
parison against baselines.
Overall, as can be seen, our
method outperforms all baselines by some margin on both
synthesis quality and animation accuracy. Speciﬁcally, Dis-
coFaceGAN [13] suffers from inconsistent identity during
animation. Moreover, it cannot generate reasonable mouth
interior, e.g. stretched teeth. 3DFaceshop and AnifaceGAN
synthesize 3D-consistent images, nevertheless, still strug-
gle to model consistent mouth interior with the driving im-
ages. This is because their implicit deformation approaches
are under-constrained, leading to overﬁt the expression bias
(smiling with mouth half-opened) of datasets. Compared to
1https://mediapipe.dev/
5


Figure 4. Comparison with the state-of-the-art animatable 3D & 2D image synthesis methods. We extract several frames from a video clip
and use the interpreted face model parameters to animate random virtual avatars.
Figure 5. High-quality dynamic shapes with topological changes.
As can be seen, we model detailed dynamic shapes of eyelids and
lips, while keeping glasses unchanged.
the other methods, our approach not only synthesizes im-
ages with higher quality, but also preserves more detailed
FID↓
AED↓
APD↓
APD*↓
ID↑
DiscoFaceGAN (2562) [13]
17.1
0.42
0.046
0.024
0.73
AniFaceGAN (2562) [68]
20.1
0.25
0.041
0.022
0.82
3DFaceShop (5122) [61]
23.7
0.31
0.045
0.024
0.75
Ours (5122)
3.9
0.16
0.023
0.019
0.84
Table 1. Quantitative comparison using FID, average expression
distance (AED), average pose distance (APD), and identity consis-
tency (ID) for FFHQ. APD* means calculating pose distance with
roll ﬁxed.
expressions of the driver images, including mouth interior,
eye blinks and eye movements. Furthermore, we are the
only method that supports in-plane head rotations. Fig. 5
provides visual examples of the synthesized high-quality
geometry. Our approach can model detailed shape defor-
mations (see zoomed eyelids and lips in Fig. 5) with topo-
logical awareness, i.e. glasses are kept unchanged.
Quantitative evaluation.
Tab. 1 demonstrates quantita-
6


Figure 6. Ablation study on model designs. Tstatic encourages
better identity consistency; Gteeth beneﬁts realistic mouth inte-
rior; the discriminator with Isynthetic input allows more consis-
tent reconstruction of detailed expressions.
tive results comparing our method against baselines eval-
uated on several metrics. We measure image quality with
Frechet Inception Distance (FID) [29] between the entire
FFHQ dataset and 50k generated images using randomly
sampled latent codes, camera poses, and FLAME param-
eters. Since AniFaceGAN and DiscoFaceGAN synthesize
images on the resolution of 2562, we test FID of them on
FFHQ2562.
Following [3, 39], we evaluate the faithful-
ness of the animation with the Average Expression Dis-
tance (AED), the Average Pose Distance (APD), and iden-
tity consistency (ID). For each method, we randomly sam-
ple 500 identities and animate each with randomly sampled
20 FLAME parameters of expressions and poses. Then,
we estimate the FLAME parameters for these 10000 gener-
ated images and the average distances between the driving
FLAME parameters and the reconstructed ones. For iden-
tity consistency, we randomly sample 2000 poses, 2000 sets
of FLAME parameters, and 1000 identities. Then we ran-
FID↓
AED↓
APD↓
ID↑
w/o Tstatic
6.6
0.25
0.026
0.63
w/o Gteeth(uv)
7.2
0.37
0.042
0.71
w/o Gteeth(s)
8.4
0.32
0.036
0.79
w/o Isynthetic
3.8
0.18
0.025
0.74
Ours
3.9
0.16
0.023
0.84
Table 2. Ablation study on model designs. Modeling static com-
ponents by Tstatic improves identity consistency. The teeth syn-
thesis Gteeth module beneﬁts both animation and synthesis qual-
ity signiﬁcantly while adding synthetic renderings Isynthetic into
discrimination takes both a step further.
domly select two poses and two sets of FLAME parameters
for each identity, generating a total of 1000 image pairs.
We calculate consistency metric using a pre-trained Arcface
model [15] for each image pair and report the average result.
Since the other baselines don’t support in-plane (roll) head
rotation, we further report APD* which only accounts for
poses on yaw and pitch. Our method achieves the best per-
formance on all metrics. Note that our model demonstrates
signiﬁcant improvements in FID, bringing animatable 3D
GAN to the same level as unconditional 3D GANs (4.7 for
EG3D [7]). For AED and APD, we also show superiority
against baselines. Note that we still achieve the best pose
consistency (0.019) when only considering yaw and pitch.
4.2. Ablation study
Static tri-planes. As suggested by the grey lines in Fig. 8,
this baseline removes the static tri-planes Tstatic and en-
tangles both dynamic and static components in Tuv. As
illustrated in the ﬁrst row of Fig. 6, the identities change
when varying expressions. Since there are no explicit con-
straints for identity consistency, the model would be prone
to unexpected entanglement between expression and iden-
tity. Tab. 2 shows a similar trend where removing Tstatic
leads to worse identity consistency.
Mouth Synthesis.
When removing the mouth synthesis
module Gteeth, we consider two altered choices: represent-
ing mouth features by Tstatic or Tuv, named w/o Gteeth(s)
(red lines in Fig. 8) and w/o Gteeth(uv) (blue lines in
Fig. 8), respectively. The ﬁrst baseline, illustrated in the
second row of Fig. 6, suffers from ’hole’ artifacts of mouth.
This is because inferior teeth move along with the jaw ro-
tations and thus cannot be modeled by static features. The
second baseline modeling teeth with Tuv also leads to an
unreasonable mouth interior since the FLAME template
doesn’t account for teeth area and the neural textures for
teeth would be sampled from other unrelated areas leading
to artifacts. Quantitatively, both baselines without Gteeth
show signiﬁcant degradation in AED and APD.
Deformation-aware discriminator. Tab. 2 demonstrates
that the deformation-aware discriminator with Isynthetic in-
7


Figure 7. Applications of our model. We use PTI [53] to ﬁt 3D-aware avatars for real portraits and animate them with sampled video clips.
Furthermore, we leverage StyleGAN-NADA [21] into 3D settings and adapt these avatars into textually-prescribed domains.
Figure 8. Illustrations of the proposed three variants of our model
for ablation study.
put improves both animation accuracy and identity consis-
tency, at the negligible expense of slightly reduced image
quality. In Fig. 6, we see that this design shows a better
exploration of rare expressions, e.g. eye blinks.
4.3. Applications
One-shot portrait animation. Fig. 7 shows the application
of our model for one-shot head avatars. The learned gen-
erative animatbale 3D representation with expressive latent
space can serve as a strong 3D prior for high-ﬁdelity single-
view 3D reconstruction and animation. Note that we can
generate natural and consistent animations without video
data training.
Animatable 3D-aware stylization.
Inspired by IDE-
3D [58], we incorporate 2D CLIP-guided style tranfer
methods [21] with our animatable 3D representation for
3D-aware portrait stylization. The right three columns of
Fig. 7 show examples of text-driven, stylized portrait ani-
mation. Speciﬁcally, to adapt a pre-trained model through
only a textual prompt, we optimize the generator with two
kinds of CLIP-based guidance [21]. However, leveraging
text-guided 2D methods directly into the 3D setting is chal-
lenging as it tends to break 3D awareness and deformation
awareness inherited in the generator parameters. To this
end, we make some necessary modiﬁcations to the train-
ing framework. Please refer to the supplemental material
for details. As shown in Fig. 7, we achieve high-quality
3D-aware stylized portrait synthesis with preserving well
properties (i.e. 3D consistency and accurate animation).
5. Limitations and future work
Though our approach enables reasonable extrapolation
on some rare expressions (e.g. eye blinks, pouting, etc.), it
struggles to model some other challenging expressions with
full consistency, such as one-side mouth up, frown, sticking
tongue out, etc. We could use high-quality video clips with
more abundant expressions for training as well as a more
powerful face model for better extrapolation. We leave it
for future work. Furthermore, our model has the potential
to provide a strong 3D prior for accelerating person-speciﬁc
avatar reconstruction. Besides, extending our methods into
full-body settings is also a promising direction.
6. Conclusion
We have presented Next3D, a novel animatable 3D rep-
resentation for unsupervised learning of high-quality and
3D-consistent virtual facial avatars from unstructured 2D
images. Our approach has pushed the frontier of photore-
alistic animatbale 3D-aware image synthesis. Serving as
a strong 3D prior, we believe our learned 3D representa-
tion will boost a series of downstream applications includ-
ing 3D-aware one-shot facial avatars and animatable out-of-
domain avatar generation.
8


References
[1] ShahRukh Athar, Zexiang Xu, Kalyan Sunkavalli, Eli
Shechtman, and Zhixin Shu. Rignerf: Fully controllable neu-
ral 3d portraits. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 20364–
20373, 2022. 3
[2] Hendrik Baatz, Jonathan Granskog, Marios Papas, Fabrice
Rousselle, and Jan Nov´ak. Nerf-tex: Neural reﬂectance ﬁeld
textures. In Computer Graphics Forum. Wiley Online Li-
brary, 2021. 3
[3] Alexander W. Bergman, Petr Kellnhofer, Wang Yifan,
Eric R. Chan, David B. Lindell, and Gordon Wetzstein. Gen-
erative neural articulated radiance ﬁelds. In NeurIPS, 2022.
2, 5, 7, 13
[4] Volker Blanz and Thomas Vetter. A morphable model for
the synthesis of 3d faces. In Proceedings of the 26th Annual
Conference on Computer Graphics and Interactive Tech-
niques, SIGGRAPH ’99, page 187–194, USA, 1999. ACM
Press/Addison-Wesley Publishing Co. 2, 3
[5] Andrei Burov, Matthias Nießner, and Justus Thies. Dynamic
surface function networks for clothed human bodies.
In
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on
Computer Vision, pages 10754–10764, 2021. 3
[6] Shengqu Cai, Anton Obukhov, Dengxin Dai, and Luc
Van Gool.
Pix2nerf: Unsupervised conditional p-gan for
single image to neural radiance ﬁelds translation. In Pro-
ceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition, pages 3981–3990, 2022. 2
[7] Eric R. Chan, Connor Z. Lin, Matthew A. Chan, Koki
Nagano, Boxiao Pan, Shalini De Mello, Orazio Gallo,
Leonidas Guibas, Jonathan Tremblay, Sameh Khamis, Tero
Karras, and Gordon Wetzstein.
Efﬁcient geometry-aware
3D generative adversarial networks. In Proceedings of the
IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision (CVPR),
2021. 2, 4, 5, 7, 13
[8] Eric R Chan, Marco Monteiro, Petr Kellnhofer, Jiajun Wu,
and Gordon Wetzstein. pi-gan: Periodic implicit generative
adversarial networks for 3d-aware image synthesis. In Pro-
ceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2021. 2
[9] Xu Chen, Tianjian Jiang, Jie Song, Jinlong Yang, Michael J
Black, Andreas Geiger, and Otmar Hilliges.
gdna: To-
wards generative detailed neural avatars. In Proceedings of
the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, pages 20427–20437, 2022. 2
[10] Yuedong Chen, Qianyi Wu, Chuanxia Zheng, Tat-Jen Cham,
and Jianfei Cai. Sem2nerf: Converting single-view semantic
masks to neural radiance ﬁelds. In ECCV, 2022. 2
[11] Zhiqin Chen and Hao Zhang. Learning implicit ﬁelds for
generative shape modeling. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
pages 5939–5948, 2019. 3
[12] Hang Dai, Nick Pears, William Smith, and Christian Dun-
can. Statistical modeling of craniofacial shape and texture.
International Journal of Computer Vision, 128(2):547–571,
2020. 3
[13] Yu Deng, Jiaolong Yang, Dong Chen, Fang Wen, and Tong
Xin. Disentangled and controllable face image generation
via 3d imitative-contrastive learning. In Proceedings of the
IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recogni-
tion (CVPR), 2020. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6
[14] Yu Deng, Jiaolong Yang, Jianfeng Xiang, and Xin Tong.
Gram: Generative radiance manifolds for 3d-aware image
generation. arXiv:2112.08867, 2021. 2
[15] Yu Deng, Jiaolong Yang, Sicheng Xu, Dong Chen, Yunde
Jia, and Xin Tong.
Accurate 3d face reconstruction with
weakly-supervised learning: From single image to image set.
In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition Workshops, pages 0–0, 2019.
5, 7, 13
[16] Michail Christos Doukas, Stefanos Zafeiriou, and Viktoriia
Sharmanska. Headgan: One-shot neural head synthesis and
editing. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Con-
ference on Computer Vision, pages 14398–14407, 2021. 2,
3
[17] Yao Feng, Haiwen Feng, Michael J Black, and Timo Bolkart.
Learning an animatable detailed 3d face model from in-
the-wild images.
ACM Transactions on Graphics (ToG),
40(4):1–13, 2021. 5, 13, 14
[18] Ohad Fried, Ayush Tewari, Michael Zollh¨ofer, Adam Finkel-
stein, Eli Shechtman, Dan B Goldman, Kyle Genova, Zeyu
Jin, Christian Theobalt, and Maneesh Agrawala. Text-based
editing of talking-head video. ACM Transactions on Graph-
ics (TOG), 38(4):1–14, 2019. 3
[19] Matheus Gadelha, Subhransu Maji, and Rui Wang. 3d shape
induction from 2d views of multiple objects. In International
Conference on 3D Vision (3DV), 2017. 2
[20] Guy Gafni, Justus Thies, Michael Zollhofer, and Matthias
Nießner. Dynamic neural radiance ﬁelds for monocular 4d
facial avatar reconstruction. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
Conferfence on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
pages 8649–8658, 2021. 3
[21] Rinon Gal, Or Patashnik, Haggai Maron, Amit H Bermano,
Gal Chechik, and Daniel Cohen-Or. Stylegan-nada: Clip-
guided domain adaptation of image generators. ACM Trans-
actions on Graphics (TOG), 41(4):1–13, 2022. 8, 13, 14
[22] Baris Gecer, Binod Bhattarai, Josef Kittler, and Tae-Kyun
Kim. Semi-supervised adversarial learning to generate pho-
torealistic face images of new identities from 3d morphable
model. In Proceedings of the European conference on com-
puter vision (ECCV), pages 217–234, 2018. 3
[23] Baris Gecer, Stylianos Ploumpis, Irene Kotsia, and Stefanos
Zafeiriou.
Ganﬁt: Generative adversarial network ﬁtting
for high ﬁdelity 3d face reconstruction. In Proceedings of
the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern
recognition, pages 1155–1164, 2019. 3
[24] Ian Goodfellow, Jean Pouget-Abadie, Mehdi Mirza, Bing
Xu, David Warde-Farley, Sherjil Ozair, Aaron Courville, and
Yoshua Bengio. Generative adversarial nets. Advances in
neural information processing systems, 27, 2014. 2
[25] Philip-William Grassal,
Malte Prinzler,
Titus Leistner,
Carsten Rother, Matthias Nießner, and Justus Thies. Neural
head avatars from monocular rgb videos. In Proceedings of
9


the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, pages 18653–18664, 2022. 3
[26] Artur Grigorev, Karim Iskakov, Anastasia Ianina, Renat
Bashirov, Ilya Zakharkin, Alexander Vakhitov, and Victor
Lempitsky. Stylepeople: A generative model of fullbody hu-
man avatars. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 5151–
5160, 2021. 3
[27] Jiatao Gu, Lingjie Liu, Peng Wang, and Christian Theobalt.
Stylenerf:
A style-based 3d-aware generator for high-
resolution image synthesis. arXiv:2110.08985, 2021. 2, 5
[28] Philipp Henzler, Niloy J Mitra, and Tobias Ritschel. Escap-
ing plato’s cave: 3d shape from adversarial rendering. In
Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Com-
puter Vision (CVPR), 2019. 2
[29] Martin Heusel, Hubert Ramsauer, Thomas Unterthiner,
Bernhard Nessler, and Sepp Hochreiter. Gans trained by a
two time-scale update rule converge to a local nash equilib-
rium. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
(NeurIPS), 2017. 7
[30] Fangzhou Hong, Zhaoxi Chen, Yushi Lan, Liang Pan, and
Ziwei Liu. Eva3d: Compositional 3d human generation from
2d image collections.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.04888,
2022. 2
[31] Yang Hong, Bo Peng, Haiyao Xiao, Ligang Liu, and Juy-
ong Zhang.
Headnerf: A real-time nerf-based parametric
head model. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 20374–
20384, 2022. 3
[32] Angjoo Kanazawa, Shubham Tulsiani, Alexei A Efros, and
Jitendra Malik. Learning category-speciﬁc mesh reconstruc-
tion from image collections.
In Proceedings of the Euro-
pean Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV), pages 371–
386, 2018. 3
[33] Tero Karras, Samuli Laine, and Timo Aila. A style-based
generator architecture for generative adversarial networks.
In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pages 4401–4410, 2019. 5
[34] Tero Karras, Samuli Laine, Miika Aittala, Janne Hellsten,
Jaakko Lehtinen, and Timo Aila. Analyzing and improving
the image quality of stylegan. In Proceedings of the IEEE
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
2020. 4
[35] Hyeongwoo Kim, Pablo Garrido, Ayush Tewari, Weipeng
Xu, Justus Thies, Matthias Niessner, Patrick P´erez, Chris-
tian Richardt, Michael Zollh¨ofer, and Christian Theobalt.
Deep video portraits. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG),
37(4):1–14, 2018. 2, 3, 5
[36] Jeong-gi Kwak, Yuanming Li, Dongsik Yoon, Donghyeon
Kim, David Han, and Hanseok Ko. Injecting 3d perception
of controllable nerf-gan into stylegan for editable portrait im-
age synthesis. In Proceedings of European Conference on
Computer Vision (ECCV), 2022. 2
[37] Henning Lange and J Nathan Kutz. Fc2t2: The fast contin-
uous convolutional taylor transform with applications in vi-
sion and graphics. arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.00110, 2021.
3
[38] Tianye Li, Timo Bolkart, Michael J Black, Hao Li, and Javier
Romero. Learning a model of facial shape and expression
from 4d scans. ACM Trans. Graph., 36(6):194–1, 2017. 3, 4
[39] Connor Z Lin, David B Lindell, Eric R Chan, and Gordon
Wetzstein. 3d gan inversion for controllable portrait image
animation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.13441, 2022. 2, 7
[40] Ben Mildenhall, Pratul P Srinivasan, Matthew Tancik,
Jonathan T Barron, Ravi Ramamoorthi, and Ren Ng. Nerf:
Representing scenes as neural radiance ﬁelds for view
synthesis.
In European Conference on Computer Vision
(ECCV), 2020. 3
[41] Thu Nguyen-Phuoc, Chuan Li, Lucas Theis, Christian
Richardt, and Yong-Liang Yang.
Hologan: Unsupervised
learning of 3d representations from natural images. In Pro-
ceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Computer
Vision, 2019. 2
[42] Thu H Nguyen-Phuoc, Christian Richardt, Long Mai,
Yongliang Yang, and Niloy Mitra.
Blockgan: Learning
3d object-aware scene representations from unlabelled im-
ages. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems
(NeurIPS), 2020. 2
[43] Michael Niemeyer and Andreas Geiger. Giraffe: Represent-
ing scenes as compositional generative neural feature ﬁelds.
In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2021. 2
[44] Atsuhiro Noguchi, Xiao Sun, Stephen Lin, and Tatsuya
Harada. Unsupervised learning of efﬁcient geometry-aware
neural articulated representations. In Proceedings of Euro-
pean Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV), 2022. 2
[45] Michael Oechsle, Lars Mescheder, Michael Niemeyer, Thilo
Strauss, and Andreas Geiger. Texture ﬁelds: Learning tex-
ture representations in function space. In Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision,
pages 4531–4540, 2019. 3
[46] Roy
Or-El,
Xuan
Luo,
Mengyi
Shan,
Eli
Shecht-
man, Jeong Joon Park, and Ira Kemelmacher-Shlizerman.
StyleSDF: High-Resolution 3D-Consistent Image and Ge-
ometry Generation. arXiv:2112.11427, 2021. 2, 5
[47] Xingang Pan, Xudong Xu, Chen Change Loy, Christian
Theobalt, and Bo Dai.
A shading-guided generative im-
plicit model for shape-accurate 3d-aware image synthe-
sis.
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
34:20002–20013, 2021. 2
[48] Jeong Joon Park, Peter Florence, Julian Straub, Richard
Newcombe, and Steven Lovegrove. Deepsdf: Learning con-
tinuous signed distance functions for shape representation.
In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2019. 3
[49] Songyou Peng, Michael Niemeyer, Lars Mescheder, Marc
Pollefeys, and Andreas Geiger.
Convolutional occupancy
networks.
In European Conference on Computer Vision,
pages 523–540. Springer, 2020. 3
[50] Hanspeter Pﬁster, Matthias Zwicker, Jeroen Van Baar, and
Markus Gross. Surfels: Surface elements as rendering primi-
tives. In Proceedings of the 27th annual conference on Com-
puter graphics and interactive techniques, pages 335–342,
2000. 3
10
