Title: Dr.Hair: Reconstructing Scalp-Connected Hair Strands without Pre-Training via Differentiable Rendering of Line Segments

MegaPortraits: One-shot Megapixel Neural Head Avatars
Nikita Drobyshev
Samsung AI Center - Moscow
Russia
Jenya Chelishev
Samsung AI Center - Moscow
Russia
Taras Khakhulin
Samsung AI Center - Moscow
Skolkovo Institute of Science and
Technology
Russia
Aleksei Ivakhnenko
Samsung AI Center - Moscow
Russia
Victor Lempitsky
Yandex
Armenia
Egor Zakharov
Samsung AI Center - Moscow
Skolkovo Institute of Science and
Technology
Russia
Source
Driver
Ours
Driver
Ours
Figure 1: We present the first system capable of creating megapixel avatars from single portrait images. Our method outper-
forms its competitors in the quality of the cross-driving results and manages to preserve the high-resolution appearance of
the source image even for out-of-domain examples like paintings, as seen in this example.
ABSTRACT
In this work, we advance the neural head avatar technology to
the megapixel resolution while focusing on the particularly chal-
lenging task of cross-driving synthesis, i.e., when the appearance
of the driving image is substantially different from the animated
source image. We propose a set of new neural architectures and
training methods that can leverage both medium-resolution video
data and high-resolution image data to achieve the desired levels
of rendered image quality and generalization to novel views and
motion. We demonstrate that suggested architectures and methods
produce convincing high-resolution neural avatars, outperforming
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s).
MM ’22, October 10–14, 2022, Lisboa, Portugal
© 2022 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-9203-7/22/10.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3503161.3547838
the competitors in the cross-driving scenario. Lastly, we show how
a trained high-resolution neural avatar model can be distilled into
a lightweight student model which runs in real-time and locks the
identities of neural avatars to several dozens of pre-defined source
images. Real-time operation and identity lock are essential for many
practical applications head avatar systems. MegaPortraits website
CCS CONCEPTS
• Computing methodologies →Image-based rendering; Neu-
ral networks.
KEYWORDS
Neural rendering, generative models, one-shot neural avatars
ACM Reference Format:
Nikita Drobyshev, Jenya Chelishev, Taras Khakhulin, Aleksei Ivakhnenko,
Victor Lempitsky, and Egor Zakharov. 2022. MegaPortraits: One-shot Megapixel
Neural Head Avatars. In Proceedings of the 30th ACM International Confer-
ence on Multimedia (MM ’22), October 10–14, 2022, Lisboa, Portugal. ACM,
New York, NY, USA, 18 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3503161.3547838
arXiv:2207.07621v2  [cs.CV]  28 Mar 2023


MM ’22, October 10–14, 2022, Lisboa, Portugal
Nikita Drobyshev et al.
1
INTRODUCTION
Neural head avatars [3, 8, 12, 17–19, 22, 23, 25, 26, 30, 34, 38, 39]
offer a new fascinating way of creating virtual head models. They
bypass the complexity of realistic physics-based modeling of human
avatars by learning the shape and appearance directly from the
videos of talking people. Over the last several years, methods that
can create realistic avatars from a single photograph (one-shot)
have been developed [8, 26, 34, 38]. They leverage extensive pre-
training on the large datasets of videos of different people [4, 34] to
create the avatars in the one-shot mode using generic knowledge
about human appearance.
Despite the impressive results obtained by this class of methods,
their quality is severely limited by the resolution of the training
datasets. This limitation cannot be easily bypassed by collecting a
higher resolution dataset since it needs to be simultaneously large-
scale and diverse, i.e., include thousands of humans with multiple
frames per person, diverse demographics, lighting, background, face
expression, and head pose. To the best of our knowledge, all public
datasets [4, 34] that meet these criteria are limited in resolution. As
a result, even the most recent one-shot avatar systems [34] learn
the avatars at resolutions up to 512 × 512.
In our work, we make three main contributions. First, we propose
a new model for one-shot neural avatars that achieves state-of-the-
art cross-reenactment quality in up to 512 × 512 resolution. In our
architecture, we utilize the idea of representing the appearance
of the avatars as a latent 3D volume [34] and propose a new way
to combine it with the latent motion representations [3], which
includes a novel contrastive loss that allows our system to achieve
higher degrees of disentanglement between the latent motion and
appearance representations. On top of that, we add a problem-
specific gaze loss that increases the realism and accuracy of eye
animation.
Our second and crucial contribution is showing how a model
trained on medium-resolution videos can be “upgraded” to the
megapixel (1024 × 1024) resolution using an additional dataset
of high-resolution still images. As a result, our proposed method,
while using the same training dataset, outperforms the baseline
super-resolution approach [37] for the task of cross-reenactment.
We are thus the first to demonstrate neural head avatars in proper
megapixel resolution.
Lastly, since many practical applications for human avatar cre-
ation require real-time or faster than real-time rendering, we distill
our megapixel model into ten times faster student model that runs
at 130 FPS on a modern GPU. This significant speedup is possible
since the student is trained for specific appearances (unlike the
main model that can create new avatars for previously unseen peo-
ple). Furthermore, the applications based on such a student model
“locked” to predefined identities can prevent its misuse for creat-
ing “deep fakes” while at the same time achieving low rendering
latency.
2
RELATED WORK
The recent success of neural implicit scene representations [21] for
the problem of 3D reconstruction has inspired several works on
the so-called 4D head avatars [10, 18, 19, 22, 23, 36], which treat
the problem of appearance and motion modeling of the avatars as a
non-rigid reconstruction of the training video. These methods have
different ways of handling the non-rigidity of motion and either
learn it from scratch [22, 23, 36], use pre-trained motion extrac-
tors [10] or pre-computed coarse meshes [18, 19]. While all these
methods can achieve an impressive realism of renders and fidelity
of motions, they require multi-shot training data, are trained sepa-
rately for each avatar, and often fail to represent motions unseen
during training. In contrast, our method can impose motion from an
arbitrary video sequence on an appearance obtained from a single
image while still achieving megapixel resolutions of the renders.
Direct generation of videos via convolutional neural networks,
conditioned on appearance and motion descriptors, is an alternative
approach to talking-head synthesis. While the early works in this
area learned an avatar from the video [17, 30], the follow-up works
added few-shot and one-shot capabilities [3, 8, 25, 26, 34, 38, 39].
Most of these works use explicit representations for the motion,
such as keypoints or blendshapes, while others [3] have adopted
latent motion parameterization. The latter achieves better expres-
siveness of motion if the disentanglement from the appearance is
achieved during training. In our system, we chose the latter ap-
proach and proposed a new method of disentangling the motion
and the appearance descriptors, which significantly improves the
quality of the results.
The resolution of the talking head models is currently upper
bounded by the available video datasets [4, 34], which contain
videos of at most 512×512 resolution. This problem further restricts
the enhancement of the output quality on the existing datasets using
the standard high-quality image and video synthesis techniques [32,
33]. Alternatively, this problem could be treated as single image
super-resolution (SISR). This way, we require only the dataset of
still high-resolution images for training, which is easier to obtain.
However, the quality of the outputs of the one-shot talking head
model varies greatly depending on the imposed motion, which
results in poor performance of standard SISR methods [37]. These
classic approaches rely on supervised training procedures with
an a priori known ground truth, which we cannot provide for the
novel motion data since we only have one image per person. We
address this problem in a novel way by combining supervised and
unsupervised training and achieve considerably better performance
for arbitrary motion data than the solution based on SISR.
3
METHOD
We propose a system for the one-shot creation of high-resolution
human avatars, called megapixel portraits or MegaPortraits for short.
Our model is trained in two stages. Optionally, we propose an
additional distillation stage for faster inference. Our training setup
is relatively standard. We sample two random frames from our
dataset at each step: the source frame x𝑠and the driver frame
x𝑑. Our model imposes the motion of the driving frame (i.e., the
head pose and the facial expression) onto the appearance of the
source frame to produce an image ˆx𝑠→𝑑. The main learning signal
is obtained from the training episodes where the source and the
driver frames come from the same video, and hence our model’s
prediction is trained to match the driver frame. In this section, we
will focus on the principal training regime while leaving details of
the architectures to the supplementary materials.


MegaPortraits: One-shot Megapixel Neural Head Avatars
MM ’22, October 10–14, 2022, Lisboa, Portugal
Pretrained
Figure 2: Overview of our base model. To encode the appearance of the source frame, we predict volumetric features v𝑠and a
global descriptor e𝑠from the source image via an appearance encoder Eapp. In parallel, we predict the motion representations
from both the source and driving images using a motion encoder Emtn. These representations consist of the explicit head
rotations R𝑠/𝑑, translations t𝑠/𝑑, and the latent expression descriptors z𝑠/𝑑. They are used to predict the 3D warpings w𝑠→and
w→𝑑via the separate warping generators W𝑠→and W→𝑑. The first warping removes the source motion from the appearance
features v𝑠by mapping them into a canonical coordinate space, and the second one imposes the driver motion. The canonical
volume is processed by a 3D convolutional network G3D, and the driving volume v𝑠→𝑑is orthographically projected into 2D
features and processed by a 2D convolutional network G2D, which predicts an output image ˆx𝑠→𝑑.
3.1
Base model
During the first stage, we train our base model (Figure 2) by sam-
pling two frames x𝑠and x𝑑from a random training video. The
driving frame acts as both an input for our system and the ground
truth. The source frame x𝑠is passed through an appearance encoder
Eapp, which outputs local volumetric features v𝑠(a 4D tensor with
the fourth dimension corresponding to channels), and the global
descriptor e𝑠. In parallel, the motion descriptors of the source and
driver images are calculated by separately applying a motion en-
coder Emtn to each image. This encoder outputs head rotations R𝑠/𝑑,
translations t𝑠/𝑑, and latent expression descriptors z𝑠/𝑑. The source
tuple (R𝑠, t𝑠, z𝑠, e𝑠) is then input into a warping generator W𝑠→to
produce a 3D warping field w𝑠→, which removes the motion data
from the volumetric features v𝑠by mapping them into a canonical
coordinate space. These features are then processed by a 3D con-
volutional network G3D. Finally, the driver tuple (R𝑑, t𝑑, z𝑑, e𝑠) is
fed into a separate warping generator W→𝑑, which output w→𝑑is
used to impose the driver motion. The final 4D volumetric features
are therefore obtained in the following way:
v𝑠→𝑑= w→𝑑◦G3D(w𝑠→◦v𝑠),
(1)
where ◦represents a 3D warping operation. The idea behind this
approach is first to rotate the volumetric features into a frontal
viewpoint, remove any face expression motion decoded from z𝑠,
process them by a 3D convolutional network, and then impose the
driver head rotation and motion. We use a pre-trained network to
estimate head rotation data, but the latent expression vectors z𝑠/𝑑
and the warpings to and from the canonical coordinate space are
trained without direct supervision.
The volumetric feature encoding and the explicit use of head pose
are inspired by [34]. However, a significant difference with [34]
is that we do not use keypoints to represent expression and in-
stead rely on the latent descriptor [3], which is decoded into the
explicit 3D warping field to represent face mimics in a more person-
independent way. We have also observed that the motion disen-
tanglement scheme proposed in [3] starts to fail when we increase
the capacity of the avatar system to facilitate higher resolutions.
This problem leads to severe appearance leakage from the driv-
ing to the predicted image. To combat that, we propose using a
cycle-consistency loss, which we describe below, and improving the
driving image’s pre-processing pipeline. For more details, please
refer to the supplementary materials.
Finally, the driver volumetric features v𝑠→𝑑are orthographically
projected into the camera frame using the same approach as in [34].
We denote this operation as P. The resulting 2D feature map is
decoded into the output image by a 2D convolutional network G2D:
ˆx𝑠→𝑑= G2D
 P(v𝑠→𝑑).
(2)
We refer to the combination of the networks described above as
Gbase, so that
ˆx𝑠→𝑑= Gbase(x𝑠, x𝑑).
(3)
We use multiple loss functions for training, which can be split
into two groups. The first group consists of the standard train-
ing objectives for image synthesis. These include perceptual [14]
and GAN [33] losses that match the predicted image ˆx𝑠→𝑑to the
ground-truth x𝑑. The other objective regularizes the training and in-
troduces disentanglement between the motion and canonical space
appearance features via the cycle consistency [42] loss.
Perceptual losses match the motion and appearance of the pre-
dicted image ˆx𝑠→𝑑to the ground-truth x𝑑. We use three types of
pre-trained networks for the perceptual losses: regular ILSVRC (Im-
ageNet) [6] pre-trained VGG19 [27] to match the general content of


MM ’22, October 10–14, 2022, Lisboa, Portugal
Nikita Drobyshev et al.
the images, VGGFace [24] trained for face recognition to match the
facial appearance, and a specialized gaze loss based on VGG16 to
match the gaze direction. The latter network was trained to distill
a state-of-the-art gaze detection system [9]. For more details on
the training and usage of gaze loss, please refer to the supplemen-
tary materials. We calculate the weighted L1 distance between the
feature maps obtained for the predicted ˆx𝑠→𝑑and ground-truth
x𝑑images using all these networks. The final perceptual loss is a
weighted combination of individual perceptual losses:
Lper = 𝑤INLIN + 𝑤faceLface + 𝑤gazeLgaze.
(4)
Adversarial losses ensure the realism of the predicted images. We
calculate these losses using the same predicted and driving images.
Following the previous works, we train a multi-scale patch discrim-
inator [42] with a hinge adversarial loss alongside the generator
Gbase. We also include a standard feature-matching loss [33] to
improve the training stability. The GAN loss for the generator can
therefore be expressed as follows:
LGAN = 𝑤advLadv + 𝑤FMLFM.
(5)
Cycle consistency loss is used to prevent the appearance leakage
through the motion descriptor. During training, this task is essential
since the motion descriptor is calculated using the same image
as the ground truth. Without this regularizer, severe artifacts are
present when the driver differs from the source in lighting, hair and
beard style, or sunglasses because these features are leaked from
the driver image onto the predicted image.
In order to calculate this loss, we use an additional source-driving
pair x𝑠∗and x𝑑∗, which is sampled from a different video and there-
fore has different appearance from the current x𝑠, x𝑑pair. We then
apply the full base model to produce the following cross-reenacted
image: ˆx𝑠∗→𝑑= Gbase(x𝑠∗, x𝑑), and also separately calculate a mo-
tion descriptor z𝑑∗= Emtn(x𝑑∗). Note that we will also use the
stored motion descriptors z𝑠∗→𝑑and z𝑠→𝑑from the respective for-
ward passes of the base network.
We then arrange the motion descriptors into positive pairs P that
should align with each other: P =

(z𝑠→𝑑, z𝑑), (z𝑠∗→𝑑, z𝑑)
	, and
the negative pairs: N =

(z𝑠→𝑑, z𝑑∗), (z𝑠∗→𝑑, z𝑑∗)
	
. These pairs are
used to calculate the following cosine distance:
𝑑(z𝑖, z𝑗) = 𝑠·  ⟨z𝑖, z𝑗⟩−𝑚,
(6)
where both 𝑠and𝑚are hyperparameters. This distance is then used
to calculate a large margin cosine loss (CosFace) [31]:
Lcos = −
∑︁
(z𝑘,z𝑙) ∈P
log
exp

𝑑(z𝑘, z𝑙)
	
exp

𝑑(z𝑘, z𝑙)
	
+
Í
(z𝑖,z𝑗) ∈N
exp

𝑑(z𝑖, z𝑗)
	 . (7)
To conclude, the total loss which is used to train the base model
is the sum of individual losses:
Lbase = Lper + LGAN + 𝑤cosLcos.
(8)
These losses are calculated using only foreground regions in
both predictions and the ground truth. Hence, our model has no
background generation built into it, which we found empirically to
hinder its performance. Instead, we impose the background post-
training via pre-trained inpainting and matting models. We obtain
the background plate using a state-of-the-art inpainting system [29]
and use the following systems for matting [11, 16]. The background
is combined with the predicted image via alpha-compositing using a
calculated matte. For more details, please refer to the supplementary
materials.
3.2
High-resolution model
For the second training stage, we fix the base neural head avatar
model Gbase, and only train an image-to-image translation network
Genh that maps the input ˆx at the resolution 512×512 to an enhanced
version ˆxHR that has the resolution 1024 × 1024. We use a high-
resolution dataset of photographs [15] to train this model, in which
we assume all images to have different identities. It implies that we
cannot form source-driver pairs that only differ in their motion as
we do in the first training stage.
The high-resolution model is trained using two groups of loss
functions. The first group represents the standard super-resolution
objectives, for which use an 𝐿1 loss, denoted as LMAE, and a GAN
loss LGAN. The second group of objectives works in an unsuper-
vised way, and we use it to ensure that our model performs well
for the images generated in a cross-driving scenario. To do that,
for each training image xHR we sample an additional image xHR
c ,
and generate its initial reconstruction ˆxc = Gbase(xLR, xLR
c ), where
xLR
c
is used to estimate motion, and xLR is used to estimate ap-
pearance. Since we do not have high-resolution ground-truth for
ˆxHR
c
= Genh(ˆxc), we can only match its distribution to ground
truth using a patch discriminator. Furthermore, we can enforce con-
tent preservation by applying the cycle-consistency loss at lower
resolution:
Lc
cyc = LMAE
 DS4(ˆxc), DS8(ˆxHR
c ),
(9)
where DS𝑘denotes a 𝑘-times downsampling operator.
The final objective for Genh includes the adversarial and the
perceptual losses calculated for the predicted image ˆxHR and its
ground-truth xHR, as well as an adversarial loss Lc
adv, calculated
for ˆxHR
𝑐
and xHR, and the cycle-consistency loss Lccyc:
Lenh = LGAN + 𝑤MAELMAE + 𝑤c
advLc
adv + 𝑤c
cycLc
cyc.
(10)
3.3
Student model
Finally, we use a small conditional image-to-image translation net-
work GDT, which we refer to as the student, to distill the one-shot
model. We train the student to mimic the prediction of the full
(teacher) model GHR = Genh ∗Gbase, which combines the base
model and an enhancer. The student is trained only in the cross-
driving mode by generating pseudo-ground truth with the teacher
model. Since we train our student network for a limited number of
avatars, we condition it using an index 𝑖, which selects an image
from the set of all 𝑁appearances {x𝑖}𝑁
𝑖=1. Therefore, training pro-
ceeds as follows: we sample the driving frame x𝑑and the index 𝑖.
We then match the following two images:
ˆxDT
𝑖→𝑑= GDT(x𝑑,𝑖);
ˆxHR
𝑖→𝑑= GHR(x𝑖, x𝑑).
We train this network using a combination of perceptual and ad-
versarial losses. For architectural details, please refer to the supple-
mentary materials.


MegaPortraits: One-shot Megapixel Neural Head Avatars
MM ’22, October 10–14, 2022, Lisboa, Portugal
Source
Driver
Face-V2V [34]
Ours
Figure 3: A qualitative comparison of head avatar systems in cross-reenactment scenario (top two rows) and self-reenactment
scenario (bottom row) at 512px resolution. In cross-reenactment, we can see that our approach achieves better preservation of
motion and appearance than the previous state-of-the-art (Face-V2V). In self-reenactment, we achieve the results of compara-
ble quality with the state-of-the-art. For more examples, please refer to the supplementary materials.
4
EXPERIMENTS
We use multiple datasets to train and evaluate our model: Vox-
Celeb2 [4] and VoxCeleb2HQ video datasets, and FFHQ [15] image
dataset. We have obtained a high-quality version of the VoxCeleb2
dataset, which we refer to as VoxCeleb2HQ, by downloading the
original videos and filtering them using both bitrate and image
quality assessment [28]. This leaves approximately one-tenth of
the original dataset (15,000 videos). We use this dataset to train and
evaluate our base model at 512 × 512 resolution while using the
original VoxCeleb2 dataset, filtered using bitrate, for the 256 × 256
resolution. For training a high-resolution model, we used a filtered
version of the FFHQ dataset, which consists of 20,000 images and
has no frames that contain multiple people or children. Lastly, we
use a proprietary dataset of 20,000 selfie videos and 100,000 selfie
pictures to train the student model.
4.1
Training details
We trained the 256 × 256 model for 200,000 iterations with the
batch size of 24, and the 512 × 512 model for 300,000 iterations with
the batch size of 16. We used AdamW [20] optimizer with cosine
learning rate scheduling. The initial learning rate was reduced from
2 ∗10−4 to 10−6 during training iterations. We used the follow-
ing hyperparameters for the losses: 𝑤IN = 20,𝑤face = 4,𝑤gaze =
5,𝑤adv = 1,𝑤FM = 40, and 𝑤cos = 2. We also set 𝑠= 5 and 𝑚= 0.2
in the cosine loss.
We trained the high-resolution enhancer model for 50,000 iter-
ations with the batch size of 16. We used the same optimizer and
the learning rate scheduling. We set the loss weights to 𝑤MAE =
100,𝑤c
adv = 1,𝑤FM = 100 and 𝑤ccyc = 10. Finally, for the student
model we distilled 100 avatars. We trained it for 170,000 iterations
with the batch size of 8. For detailed descriptions of all architectures,
please refer to the supplementary material.


MM ’22, October 10–14, 2022, Lisboa, Portugal
Nikita Drobyshev et al.
Source
Driver
FOMM [26]
HeadGAN [8]
Ours
Figure 4: A qualitative comparison of head avatar systems in cross-reenactment scenario (top two rows) and self-reenactment
scenario (bottom row) at 256 × 256 resolution. Our system significantly outperforms the competitors in cross-reenactment,
achieving more faithful motion and appearance preservation in the generated images. We also show that our system achieves
similar results in self-reenactment. For more examples, please refer to the supplementary materials.
4.2
Baseline methods
We compare our base model with the following systems.
Face Vid-to-vid (Face-V2V) [34] is a state-of-the-art system in
self-reenactment, i.e. when the source and driving images have the
same appearance and identity. Its main features are the volumetric
encoding of the avatar’s appearance and the explicit representation
of the head motion with 3D keypoints, which are learned in an
unsupervised way. In our base model, we utilize a similar volumetric
encoding of the appearance but instead encode the face motion
implicitly, which improves cross-reenactment performance.
First Order Motion Model (FOMM) [26] uses 2D keypoints to
represent motion and is another strong baseline for the task of
self-reenactment. Similar to Face-V2V, these keypoints are trained
in an unsupervised way. However, as shown in our evaluation, this
method fails to generate realistic images in the cross-reenactment
scenario.
Lastly, we compare against the HeadGAN [8] system, in which
the expression coefficients of the 3D morphable model [1] are used
as a motion representation. These coefficients are calculated using
a pre-trained dense 3D keypoints regressor [7]. Effectively, this
approach disentangles motion data from the appearance in the 3D
keypoints, but limits the space of possible motions (for example, it
does not allow the control of the gaze direction).
4.3
Cross-reenactment evaluation
Since pre-trained models of FOMM and HeadGAN are only available
at 256 × 256 resolution, we compare them against our base model
trained on a bitrate-filtered VoxCeleb2 dataset. For Face-V2V, we
compare the 512 × 512 model pre-trained on the TalkingHead-
1KH [34] dataset to our base model trained on the VoxCeleb2HQ.
For the evaluation, we use samples from the VoxCeleb2HQ and
FFHQ datasets, downscaled to the training resolution.
For quantitative evaluation, we use the following metrics. Frechet
Inception Distance (FID) [13] is used to compare the distributions of
predicted images and the images in the dataset. Cosine similarity
between the embeddings of a face recognition network (CSIM) [39]
is used to evaluate the preservation of a person’s appearance in the
predicted image. Finally, we conduct two user studies (denoted as
UMTN and UAPP) to evaluate the motion and appearance preserva-
tion. We show the crowd-sourced users a random triplet of images:
a driving example to evaluate motion preservation or a source exam-
ple to evaluate the appearance, alongside the outputs of two random
methods. We then ask each user to pick one of the two outputs
with the better-preserved motion or appearance. We then measure
the percentage of examples where each method was picked. We
conducted our experiment on approximately 2,000 crowd-sourced


MegaPortraits: One-shot Megapixel Neural Head Avatars
MM ’22, October 10–14, 2022, Lisboa, Portugal
Cross-reenactment
Method
FID↓CSIM↑UMTN↑
UAPP↑
VoxCeleb2HQ & FFHQ (256 × 256)
FOMM
79.1
0.63
24.0
27.9
HeadGAN
70.0
0.66
23.6
32.1
Ours
68.9
0.72
52.4
40.0
VoxCeleb2HQ & FFHQ (512 × 512)
Face-V2V
63.4
0.70
34.4
45.4
Ours
58.8
0.73
65.6
54.6
Self-reenactment (raw / masked)
Method
PSNR↑
SSIM↑
LPIPS↓
VoxCeleb2 (256 × 256)
FOMM
20.6 / 27.5 0.74 / 0.90 0.18 / 0.06
HeadGAN 18.6 / 26.5 0.68 / 0.88 0.20 / 0.07
Ours
18.3 / 27.0 0.67 / 0.89 0.23 / 0.07
VoxCeleb2HQ (512 × 512)
Face-V2V
21.9 / 31.2 0.76 / 0.90 0.18 / 0.06
Ours
20.2 / 30.2 0.72 / 0.89 0.22 / 0.07
Table 1: Quantitative results for cross and self-reenactment.
To evaluate cross-reenactment performance, we measure
FID (lower the better), CSIM (higher the better), and user
preference scores (UMTN measures motion preservation
and UAPP – appearance, both are higher the better). Our
method outperforms its competitors across all metrics at
both resolutions, achieving state-of-the-art results in the
cross-reenactment scenario. The gap is especially noticeable
in the user study, where we achieve significantly better mo-
tion preservation. We use standard PSNR, SSIM (higher the
better), and LPIPS (lower the better) metrics to evaluate the
self-reenactment. We measure each metric using either raw
or masked images. Our method performs similarly to the
competitors when face masking is applied while achieving
reasonable results in the unmasked (raw) scenario.
people, and each evaluation sample was shown, on average, to
twenty different users.
The qualitative results are shown in Figures 3-4, and the quanti-
tative metrics are presented in Table 1. Overall, we can see that our
method outperforms all competitors by some margin. Furthermore,
the first two rows in Figure 4 suggest that our approach is better
at preserving the shape and appearance of the source image and
the motion of the driver image, including gaze direction, than the
FOMM and HeadGAN systems. Compared to the Face V2V system
(Figure 3, first two rows), our implicit pose representation approach
prevents appearance leakage through the driving image, leading
to better preservation of the source image appearance, as well as
driver motion. These observations are confirmed by the quantita-
tive evaluation, in which we outperform our competitors across all
cross-reenactment metrics (Table 1), including both user studies.
Cross-reenactment
Method
FID↓
CSIM↑
IQA↑
Base w/ bicubic
51.4
0.67
35.1
HiFaceGAN
49.4
0.65
43.9
Ours
39.2
0.67
49.3
Table 2: Quantitative results on the FFHQ dataset in the
cross-reenactment mode at 1024×1024 resolution. Besides the
standard cross-reenactment metrics, we additionally per-
form an image quality assessment (IQA, higher the better).
Our super-resolution method improves the resulting im-
age quality compared to the base model with bicubic up-
sampling and the super-resolution baseline (HiFaceGAN), as
seen from the FID and IQA metrics. At the same time, we
preserve the source image appearance, which results in the
same CSIM as the base model.
4.4
Self-reenactment evaluation
We use the same pre-trained models for the self-reenactment ex-
periments as for the cross reenactment and evaluate them on the
samples from the VoxCeleb2 and VoxCeleb2HQ evaluation sets. In
addition, we use the following standard metrics to measure the
difference between the synthesized and ground-truth images: Peak
Signal-to-Noise Ratio (PSNR), Structural Similarity Index Measure
(SSIM) [35], and the Learned Perceptual Image Patch Similarity
(LPIPS) [40].
We notice that qualitatively we achieve similar performance to
the competitors, especially in the face and hair regions (Figures 3-4,
third row). To quantitatively verify that, we have conducted an
evaluation using masked data. The masks include the face, ears,
and hair regions and are applied to both the target and the predicted
images before calculating the metrics. In this scenario, we achieve
comparable performance to the baseline methods (Table 1) but have
an inferior performance when the unmasked (raw) images are used.
This difference could be caused, among other reasons, by the
lack of shoulders motion modeling in our method. It results in the
misalignment between our predictions and ground truth in the
corresponding regions. We further discuss this issue in the limita-
tions section. Also, our method’s high degree of disentanglement
between motion and appearance descriptors prevents it from leak-
ing the appearance data directly from the driver, which generally
contributes to the reduced performance in self-reenactment.
4.5
High-resolution evaluation
We evaluate high-resolution synthesis only in cross-reenactment
mode since data for the self-reenactment scenario is missing. We
use subsets of a filtered FFHQ dataset for training and evaluation.
We train both our and the baseline super-resolution approaches
using an output of a pre-trained base model Gbase as input and by
sampling two random augmented versions of the training image
as a source and a driver. We use random crops and rotations since
other augmentations could change person-specific traits (e.g. head
width).
We compare against two baselines. First, we consider bicubic
upsampling of the output of the base model, and second, we evaluate


MM ’22, October 10–14, 2022, Lisboa, Portugal
Nikita Drobyshev et al.
Source
Driver
Ours (base w/ bicubic)
HiFaceGAN [37]
Ours (HR)
Figure 5: A qualitative comparison of different super-resolution methods applied to the output of our base model. While per-
forming better than a baseline bicubic upsampling, we can see that the state-of-the-art super-resolution method (HiFaceGAN)
cannot achieve the same level of high-frequency details fidelity as our approach. Digital zoom-in is recommended.
a state-of-the-art face super-resolution system (HiFaceGAN) [37].
The results are presented in Figure 5, and Table 2. In the quantitative
comparison, we use an additional image quality assessment metric
(IQA) [28] to measure the resulting image quality. Our method
outperforms its competitors both qualitatively and quantitatively
by generating more high-frequency details and, at the same time,
preserving the identity of the source image.
Finally, in Figure 6 we show the results for the distillation of
our base and high-resolution models into a small student network
designed to work for a limited number of avatars. The architecture
we chose for the distillation achieves 130 frames per second on the
NVIDIA RTX 3090 graphics card in the FP16 mode. The total model
size for the student containing 100 avatars is 800 megabytes. This
model can closely match the performance of the teacher model. It
thus achieves a PSNR of 23.14 and LPIPS of 0.208 (w.r.t. the teacher
model) averaged across all avatars.
4.6
Ablation study
We conducted an extensive ablation study to evaluate the contribu-
tions of individual components within our method. Therefore, we
evaluate the importance of the proposed cycle consistency losses
for the base and high-resolution models. The qualitative results are
shown in Figure 7. Overall, both losses substantially improve the
disentanglement between the motion and appearance. The quantita-
tive evaluation confirms this: the base model without Lcos achieves
an FID of 34.8, compared to the final 28.6, and the high-resolution
model without cycle losses has an FID of 39.6, compared to the
final FID of 39.2. We also provide an in-depth evaluation of the
architectural choices in the supplementary materials.
5
CONCLUSION
We have presented a new approach for synthesizing high-resolution
neural avatars. To the best of our knowledge, this approach is
Source
Driver
Ours (HR)
Ours (dist)
Figure 6: Results of the distilled version of our system
trained for 100 avatars. It closely matches the prediction
of the teacher model while being approximately ten times
faster at the inference, achieving up to 130 FPS on a modern
GPU.
Source
Driver
w/o Lcos
w/o Lc∗
Ours (HR)
Figure 7: Ablation study. Both contrastive loss Lcos and un-
supervised super-resolution losses Lc
adv and Lccyc (denoted
as Lc∗) improve the performance of our method in the cross-
driving scenario.
the first to achieve megapixel resolution. We have also explored
a possible application of the proposed method in practice, which
involves locking the identities of the avatars by training a dedicated
student network. Using the student network also increases the


MegaPortraits: One-shot Megapixel Neural Head Avatars
MM ’22, October 10–14, 2022, Lisboa, Portugal
Source
Driver 1
Ours 1
Driver 2
Ours 2
Figure 8: The limitations of our method include the inability
to model large head rotations, which stems from the near
frontal views distribution in the training data (1st example),
and the lack of shoulders motion modeling (2nd example).
rendering speed while achieving similar quality of renders to our
full one-shot model.
Two main limitations of our system stem from the properties of
our training set. First, both the VoxCeleb2 and the FFHQ datasets
that we use for training tend to have near frontal views, which
degrades the quality of rendering for strongly non-frontal head
poses (Figure 8). Secondly, as only static views are available at high
resolution, a certain amount of temporal flicker is present in our
results (see supplementary video). Ideally, this needs to be tackled
with special losses or architectural choices. Lastly, our system lacks
the modeling of shoulders motion. Addressing the issues mentioned
above remains our future work.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We sincerely thank Michail Christos Doukas for providing us infer-
ence results of HeadGAN [8] system and Ting-Chun Wang for pro-
viding us inference results of Face-V2V [34] system. We also thank
Roman Suvorov for their comments and suggestions regarding the
text contents and clarity, as well as Julia Churkina for helping us
with proof-reading. Furthermore, we thank Dmitry Nikulin for pro-
viding code for his gaze estimation model, on the top of which we
built our gaze model. The computational resources for this work
were mainly provided by Samsung ML Platform.
REFERENCES
[1] Volker Blanz and Thomas Vetter. 1999. A morphable model for the synthesis of
3D faces. In SIGGRAPH ’99.
[2] Adrian Bulat and Georgios Tzimiropoulos. 2017. How Far are We from Solving
the 2D & 3D Face Alignment Problem? (and a Dataset of 230,000 3D Facial
Landmarks). 2017 IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) (2017),
1021–1030.
[3] Egor Burkov, I. Pasechnik, Artur Grigorev, and Victor S. Lempitsky. 2020. Neural
Head Reenactment with Latent Pose Descriptors. 2020 IEEE/CVF Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) (2020), 13783–13792.
[4] Joon Son Chung, Arsha Nagrani, and Andrew Zisserman. 2018. VoxCeleb2: Deep
Speaker Recognition. In INTERSPEECH.
[5] Kevin Cortacero, Tobias Fischer, and Yiannis Demiris. 2019. RT-BENE: A Dataset
and Baselines for Real-Time Blink Estimation in Natural Environments. In Pro-
ceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV)
Workshops.
[6] Jia Deng, Wei Dong, Richard Socher, Li-Jia Li, K. Li, and Li Fei-Fei. 2009. ImageNet:
A large-scale hierarchical image database. In CVPR.
[7] Jiankang Deng, J. Guo, Evangelos Ververas, Irene Kotsia, Stefanos Zafeiriou, and
InsightFace FaceSoft. 2020. RetinaFace: Single-Shot Multi-Level Face Localisation
in the Wild. 2020 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
(CVPR) (2020), 5202–5211.
[8] Michail Christos Doukas, Stefanos Zafeiriou, and Viktoriia Sharmanska. 2021.
HeadGAN: One-shot Neural Head Synthesis and Editing. 2021 IEEE/CVF Interna-
tional Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV).
[9] Tobias Fischer, Hyung Jin Chang, and Y. Demiris. 2018. RT-GENE: Real-Time
Eye Gaze Estimation in Natural Environments. In ECCV.
[10] Guy Gafni, Justus Thies, Michael Zollhofer, and Matthias Nießner. 2021. Dynamic
Neural Radiance Fields for Monocular 4D Facial Avatar Reconstruction. 2021
IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 8645–
8654.
[11] Ke Gong, Yiming Gao, Xiaodan Liang, Xiaohui Shen, M. Wang, and Liang Lin.
2019. Graphonomy: Universal Human Parsing via Graph Transfer Learning. 2019
IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) (2019),
7442–7451.
[12] Sungjoo Ha, Martin Kersner, Beomsu Kim, Seokjun Seo, and Dongyoung Kim.
2020. MarioNETte: Few-shot Face Reenactment Preserving Identity of Unseen
Targets. In AAAI.
[13] Martin Heusel, Hubert Ramsauer, Thomas Unterthiner, Bernhard Nessler, and
Sepp Hochreiter. 2017. GANs Trained by a Two Time-Scale Update Rule Con-
verge to a Local Nash Equilibrium. In Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems.
[14] Justin Johnson, Alexandre Alahi, and Li Fei-Fei. 2016. Perceptual Losses for
Real-Time Style Transfer and Super-Resolution. In ECCV.
[15] Tero Karras, Samuli Laine, and Timo Aila. 2019. A Style-Based Generator Ar-
chitecture for Generative Adversarial Networks. 2019 IEEE/CVF Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 4396–4405.
[16] Zhanghan Ke, Jiayu Sun, Kaican Li, Qiong Yan, and Rynson W.H. Lau. 2022.
MODNet: Real-Time Trimap-Free Portrait Matting via Objective Decomposition.
In AAAI.
[17] Hyeongwoo Kim, Pablo Garrido, Ayush Tewari, Weipeng Xu, Justus Thies,
Matthias Nießner, Patrick Pérez, Christian Richardt, Michael Zollhöfer, and Chris-
tian Theobalt. 2018. Deep video portraits. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG)
37 (2018), 1 – 14.
[18] Stephen Lombardi, Jason M. Saragih, Tomas Simon, and Yaser Sheikh. 2018. Deep
appearance models for face rendering. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG) 37
(2018), 1 – 13.
[19] Stephen Lombardi, Tomas Simon, Jason M. Saragih, Gabriel Schwartz, Andreas M.
Lehrmann, and Yaser Sheikh. 2019. Neural volumes. ACM Transactions on
Graphics (TOG) 38 (2019), 1 – 14.
[20] Ilya Loshchilov and Frank Hutter. 2019. Decoupled Weight Decay Regularization.
In ICLR.
[21] Ben Mildenhall, Pratul P. Srinivasan, Matthew Tancik, Jonathan T. Barron, Ravi
Ramamoorthi, and Ren Ng. 2020. NeRF: Representing Scenes as Neural Radiance
Fields for View Synthesis. In ECCV.
[22] Keunhong Park, U. Sinha, Jonathan T. Barron, Sofien Bouaziz, Dan B. Goldman,
Steven M. Seitz, and Ricardo Martin-Brualla. 2021. Nerfies: Deformable Neural
Radiance Fields. 2021 IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision
(ICCV).
[23] Keunhong Park, U. Sinha, Peter Hedman, Jonathan T. Barron, Sofien Bouaziz,
Dan B. Goldman, Ricardo Martin-Brualla, and Steven M. Seitz. 2021. HyperNeRF:
A Higher-Dimensional Representation for Topologically Varying Neural Radiance
Fields. ArXiv.
[24] Omkar M. Parkhi, Andrea Vedaldi, and Andrew Zisserman. 2015. Deep Face
Recognition. In BMVC.
[25] Aliaksandr Siarohin, Stéphane Lathuilière, S. Tulyakov, Elisa Ricci, and N. Sebe.
2019. Animating Arbitrary Objects via Deep Motion Transfer. 2019 IEEE/CVF
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) (2019), 2372–2381.
[26] Aliaksandr Siarohin, Stéphane Lathuilière, S. Tulyakov, Elisa Ricci, and N. Sebe.
2019. First Order Motion Model for Image Animation. ArXiv abs/2003.00196
(2019).
[27] Karen Simonyan and Andrew Zisserman. 2015. Very Deep Convolutional Net-
works for Large-Scale Image Recognition. CoRR abs/1409.1556 (2015).
[28] Shaolin Su, Qingsen Yan, Yu Zhu, Cheng Zhang, Xin Ge, Jinqiu Sun, and Yanning
Zhang. 2020. Blindly Assess Image Quality in the Wild Guided by a Self-Adaptive
Hyper Network. In IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recogni-
tion (CVPR).
[29] Roman Suvorov, Elizaveta Logacheva, Anton Mashikhin, Anastasia Remizova,
Arsenii Ashukha, Aleksei Silvestrov, Naejin Kong, Harshith Goka, Kiwoong Park,
and Victor Lempitsky. 2021. Resolution-robust Large Mask Inpainting with
Fourier Convolutions. arXiv preprint arXiv:2109.07161 (2021).
[30] Justus Thies, Michael Zollhöfer, Marc Stamminger, Christian Theobalt, and
Matthias Nießner. 2019. Face2Face: real-time face capture and reenactment
of RGB videos. ArXiv abs/2007.14808 (2019).
[31] H. Wang, Yitong Wang, Zheng Zhou, Xing Ji, Zhifeng Li, Dihong Gong, Jin
Zhou, and Wenyu Liu. 2018. CosFace: Large Margin Cosine Loss for Deep
Face Recognition. 2018 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition (2018), 5265–5274.
[32] Ting-Chun Wang, Ming-Yu Liu, Jun-Yan Zhu, Guilin Liu, Andrew Tao, Jan Kautz,
and Bryan Catanzaro. 2018. Video-to-Video Synthesis. In Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS).
[33] Ting-Chun Wang, Ming-Yu Liu, Jun-Yan Zhu, Andrew Tao, Jan Kautz, and Bryan
Catanzaro. 2018. High-Resolution Image Synthesis and Semantic Manipulation
with Conditional GANs. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition.
[34] Ting-Chun Wang, Arun Mallya, and Ming-Yu Liu. 2021. One-Shot Free-View Neu-
ral Talking-Head Synthesis for Video Conferencing. 2021 IEEE/CVF Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR).


MM ’22, October 10–14, 2022, Lisboa, Portugal
Nikita Drobyshev et al.
[35] Zhou Wang, Alan Conrad Bovik, Hamid R. Sheikh, and Eero P. Simoncelli. 2004.
Image quality assessment: from error visibility to structural similarity. IEEE
Transactions on Image Processing 13 (2004), 600–612.
[36] Gengshan Yang, Minh Vo, Natalia Neverova, Deva Ramanan, Andrea Vedaldi,
and Hanbyul Joo. 2021. BANMo: Building Animatable 3D Neural Models from
Many Casual Videos. ArXiv.
[37] Lingbo Yang, C. Liu, P. Wang, Shanshe Wang, P. Ren, Siwei Ma, and W. Gao. 2020.
HiFaceGAN: Face Renovation via Collaborative Suppression and Replenishment.
Proceedings of the 28th ACM International Conference on Multimedia (2020).
[38] Egor Zakharov, Aleksei Ivakhnenko, Aliaksandra Shysheya, and Victor S. Lem-
pitsky. 2020. Fast Bi-layer Neural Synthesis of One-Shot Realistic Head Avatars.
In ECCV.
[39] Egor Zakharov, Aliaksandra Shysheya, Egor Burkov, and Victor S. Lempitsky.
2019. Few-Shot Adversarial Learning of Realistic Neural Talking Head Models.
2019 IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV).
[40] Richard Zhang, Phillip Isola, Alexei A. Efros, Eli Shechtman, and Oliver Wang.
2018. The Unreasonable Effectiveness of Deep Features as a Perceptual Metric.
2018 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (2018),
586–595.
[41] Shifeng Zhang, Xiangyu Zhu, Zhen Lei, Hailin Shi, Xiaobo Wang, and S. Li.
2017. S3FD: Single Shot Scale-Invariant Face Detector. 2017 IEEE International
Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) (2017), 192–201.
[42] Jun-Yan Zhu, Taesung Park, Phillip Isola, and Alexei A. Efros. 2017. Unpaired
Image-to-Image Translation Using Cycle-Consistent Adversarial Networks. 2017
IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) (2017), 2242–2251.
