Title: GaussianHeads: End-to-end learning of drivable gaussian head avatars from coarse-to-fine representations

GaussianHeads: End-to-End Learning of Drivable Gaussian Head Avatars
from Coarse-to-fine Representations
KARTIK TEOTIA, Max Planck Institute for Informatics and Saarland Informatics Campus, Germany
HYEONGWOO KIM, Imperial College London, United Kingdom
PABLO GARRIDO, Flawless AI, United States
MARC HABERMANN, Max Planck Institute for Informatics and Saarland Informatics Campus, Germany
MOHAMED ELGHARIB, Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Germany
CHRISTIAN THEOBALT, Max Planck Institute for Informatics and Saarland Informatics Campus, Germany
Fig. 1. GaussianHeads renders photorealistic dynamic 3D human heads in real time. In particular, it renders fine-scale details of (facial) hair and large
geometric deformations in the mouth region at high fidelity. Each 3D Gaussian primitive, which is consistently tracked against large deformations over time,
is visualized in colors. By providing input images as a control signal, our model can also be used for creating controllable head animations.
Real-time rendering of human head avatars is a cornerstone of many com-
puter graphics applications, such as augmented reality, video games, and
films, to name a few. Recent approaches address this challenge with compu-
tationally efficient geometry primitives in a carefully calibrated multi-view
setup. Albeit producing photorealistic head renderings, they often fail to
represent complex motion changes, such as the mouth interior and strongly
varying head poses. We propose a new method to generate highly dynamic
and deformable human head avatars from multi-view imagery in real time.
At the core of our method is a hierarchical representation of head models
that can capture the complex dynamics of facial expressions and head move-
ments. First, with rich facial features extracted from raw input frames, we
learn to deform the coarse facial geometry of the template mesh. We then
initialize 3D Gaussians on the deformed surface and refine their positions in
a fine step. We train this coarse-to-fine facial avatar model along with the
head pose as learnable parameters in an end-to-end framework. This enables
not only controllable facial animation via video inputs but also high-fidelity
novel view synthesis of challenging facial expressions, such as tongue de-
formations and fine-grained teeth structure under large motion changes.
Moreover, it encourages the learned head avatar to generalize towards new
facial expressions and head poses at inference time. We demonstrate the per-
formance of our method with comparisons against the related methods on
different datasets, spanning challenging facial expression sequences across
multiple identities. We also show the potential application of our approach
Authors’ addresses: Kartik Teotia, kteotia@mpi-inf.mpg.de, Max Planck Institute for
Informatics and Saarland Informatics Campus, Germany; Hyeongwoo Kim, hyeongwoo.
kim@imperial.ac.uk, Imperial College London, United Kingdom; Pablo Garrido, pablo.
garrido@flawlessai.com, Flawless AI, United States; Marc Habermann, mhaberma@
mpi-inf.mpg.de, Max Planck Institute for Informatics and Saarland Informatics Campus,
Germany; Mohamed Elgharib, elgharib@mpi-inf.mpg.de, Max Planck Institute for
Informatics, Germany; Christian Theobalt, theobalt@mpi-inf.mpg.de, Max Planck
Institute for Informatics and Saarland Informatics Campus, Germany.
by demonstrating a cross-identity facial performance transfer application.
We make the code available on our project page.
CCS Concepts: • Computing methodologies →Rendering; Volumetric
models.
Additional Key Words and Phrases: Volumetric Rendering, 3D Gaussian
Splatting, Implicit Representations, Neural Radiance Fields, Neural Avatars,
Free-viewpoint Rendering
1
INTRODUCTION
Photorealistic modeling and rendering of human heads is essen-
tial in applications such as virtual telepresence, video games, and
movies. Achieving an immersive experience in these applications
is a long-standing research problem as it necessitates representing
facial expressions with a high degree of detail while also ensuring
real-time performance. Current approaches struggle with a trade-
off: they either excel at rendering expressions in real time but with
limited details in regions, such as mouth interior and hair [Lombardi
et al. 2018, 2021; Ma et al. 2021], or offer highly detailed reconstruc-
tions at the expense of slower rendering speeds [Gao et al. 2022;
Kirschstein et al. 2023; Teotia et al. 2024; Wang et al. 2023a].
Photorealistic avatars are commonly built on top of explicit mesh-
based representations as they offer consistent topological changes
and real-time rendering capabilities [Lombardi et al. 2018; Ma et al.
2021]. However, mesh-based representations present limited ca-
pacity to model facial structures exhibiting fine details like hair
and beards [Teotia et al. 2024]. To overcome limitations commonly
faced by explicit representations, Mixture of Volumetric Primitives
(MVP) [Lombardi et al. 2021] proposes a volumetric representation
arXiv:2409.11951v1  [cs.CV]  18 Sep 2024


2
•
Kartik Teotia, Hyeongwoo Kim, Pablo Garrido, Marc Habermann, Mohamed Elgharib, and Christian Theobalt
based on unstructured cubic primitives. However, cube-based prim-
itives have limited capability to represent fine structures [Teotia
et al. 2024; Wang et al. 2023a]. HQ3DAvatar [Teotia et al. 2024]
proposes an implicitly learned canonical representation and shows
the capability of rendering HD images at interactive speeds, yet it
suffers from blurring in regions undergoing large deformations. In
this work, we propose a novel end-to-end framework for modeling
and rendering dynamic human heads with a high level of photo-
realism in real time, as shown in Fig. 1. Our method leverages a
deformable template face mesh, learnable global transformation
parameters as part of our end-to-end learning framework, and 3D
Gaussian primitives [Kerbl et al. 2023] in a coarse-to-fine strategy
to represent the human head dynamics. This enables high-quality
representation of facial details at real-time rates (75 FPS) on a reso-
lution of 960 × 540. Our method is trained using multi-view images
in a person-specific manner. During inference, our method takes
the driving videos as input to control the digital avatar under novel
expressions, global rigid head poses, and camera viewpoints. It en-
ables controllability via an animation code and global rigid pose
parameters, both parameterized by the driving RGB videos. Such pa-
rameterization drives the 3D Gaussians in the world space, together
with a computationally efficient implementation of the Gaussian
primitive properties, such as color and opacity predictions. Our final
renderings are obtained via a tile-based rasterizer of the Gaussian
primitives [Kerbl et al. 2023]. Fig. 1 shows the deforming Gaussians
overlaid onto the RGB renderings of an expression sequence.
More specifically, our method first estimates the global rigid head
pose and other facial deformations via an image-based encoder. It
then deforms and poses a template mesh in the coarse reconstruction
step, which becomes covered with 3D Gaussian primitives in the
following refinement step. These primitives are allowed to move
beyond regions not represented by the deformed template mesh via
a learnable position decoder, and their appearance is learned via
color and opacity decoders. Our model is learned from multi-view
RGB video using photometric and perceptual loss terms, and newly
introduced geometric and temporal constraints in an end-to-end
manner. At test time, only a feed-forward pass is performed through
the learned network, significantly contributing towards the fast
rendering speed.
In summary, we make the following contributions:
• We present a novel method that leverages 3D Gaussian prim-
itives to generate volumetric head avatars. Our method is
trained using multi-view RGB video streams via several
losses, and during test time, it can render the moving head
with large deformations at real-time rates.
• We introduce a coarse-to-fine representation for head and
deformation models consisting of a deformable mesh and
Gaussian primitives to learn coarse and fine-grained ge-
ometry and appearance. This effectively improves the con-
vergence of our model leading to significantly improved
photorealism, especially in highly deforming regions, such
as the mouth interior.
• We propose an end-to-end training pipeline allowing us to
jointly supervise the head pose, geometry, and appearance
in a fully differentiable manner.
We evaluate our approach visually and numerically against ground
truth data. Here, we ablate our method with different design choices
to illustrate their importance in the overall performance. Our ap-
proach outperforms existing state-of-the art methods [Lombardi
et al. 2021; Qian et al. 2024; Teotia et al. 2024] qualitatively and
quantitatively.
2
RELATED WORK
2.1
Scene Representations
In recent years, scene representations with neural components have
unlocked potential applications in 3D reconstruction. NeRF [Milden-
hall et al. 2022] and Deep-SDF [Park et al. 2019] are early pioneering
works in modeling 3D scene properties using an MLP-based im-
plicit learning platform. While these methods demonstrated strong
results, they suffer from network capacity issues due to inefficient
scene encodings. Grid-based strategies such as Instant-NGP [Müller
et al. 2022] and other volumetric approaches [Fridovich-Keil et al.
2022; Lombardi et al. 2019] have been proposed for more efficient 3D
scene modeling. Such advances led to increased rendering quality as
well as better runtime performance. Neuro-explicit representations
use point-based priors to improve reconstruction quality and run-
time performance further. For instance, Point-NeRF [Xu et al. 2022]
introduced a hybrid representation with point clouds and neural
features to model a radiance field. Mixture of Volumetric Primitives
(MVP) [Lombardi et al. 2021] used cubic primitives weakly attached
to the tracked facial geometry to model dynamic 3D scene content.
3D Gaussian Splatting [Kerbl et al. 2023] presented Gaussian
primitives as the base representation to model 3D scene content,
with recent extensions allowing joint camera and 3D scene model-
ing [Fu et al. 2024]. Such advances have produced state-of-the-art
static 3D scene reconstruction in terms of fidelity and runtime per-
formance. Dynamic 3D Gaussians [Luiten et al. 2024] extended the
3D Gaussian Splatting framework to dynamic scenes but lacked
user control. Hence, the scene can only be replayed back from novel
camera viewpoints (i.e., no new object deformations) at inference
time. Our approach introduces a controllable 3D Gaussian splat-
ting framework for dynamic human heads. It builds on the runtime
capabilities and reconstruction fidelity introduced in 3D Gaussian
Splatting. Furthermore, it can render the examined head from a
novel camera viewpoint under different expressions at test time.
2.2
Mesh-based Head Avatars
Several avatar generation methods rely on explicit scene-tracking
provided by 3D morphable models (3DMMs) to aid with the model-
ing of dynamic expression changes. While there are some methods
that operate purely in the 2D space [Bansal et al. 2018; Siarohin
et al. 2019], these methods often suffer from limited photorealism
and generate talking faces with poor lip-sync. On the other hand,
mesh-based scene representations have been used for generating
personalized photorealistic head avatars of humans recorded in su-
pervised multi-view studio setups [Lombardi et al. 2018]. They have
also been used in neural rendering pipelines to generate portrait
avatars from 2D RGB data [Kim et al. 2018; Tewari et al. 2018; Thies
et al. 2019, 2016; Wang et al. 2023b]. However, the underlying tem-
plate fidelity of mesh-based representations is limited. Thus, such


GaussianHeads: End-to-End Learning of Drivable Gaussian Head Avatars from Coarse-to-fine Representations
•
3
representations usually struggle to represent fine details, such as
scalp hair, beard, and mouth interior.
2.3
Volumetric Head Avatars
Volumetric scene representations allow for capturing regions that
are difficult to model using parametric mesh-based head trackers,
e.g., the mouth interior. Hence, they have been an underpinning
representation for human head avatars in recent years. Furthermore,
their self-supervised training framework from 2D images makes
them a very appealing approach. In this section, we further review
template-free as well as template-based approaches for volumetric
human head avatars.
2.3.1
Template-based Approaches. Most template-based approaches
make use of a template mesh-guided canonical space to model facial
expressions [Athar et al. 2022; Gao et al. 2022; Xu et al. 2023a; Zhao
et al. 2024; Zheng et al. 2022, 2023; Zielonka et al. 2022] in a NeRF
framework. Here, methods like INSTA [Zielonka et al. 2022], IM
Avatar [Zheng et al. 2022], HAvatar [Zhao et al. 2024], and PointA-
vatars[Zheng et al. 2023] warp a world-space deformation field or
points to canonical space using a nearest neighbor strategy to be
able to deform points beyond the template representation. In con-
trast, our approach predicts per-frame tracking and learns to move
Gaussians to regions not covered by the template in an end-to-end
fashion. Other approaches, such as HeadNeRF [Hong et al. 2022]
and that of Gafni et al. [Gafni et al. 2021] use 3DMM expression coef-
ficients for conditioning the dynamic NeRF volume. Template-based
NeRF avatars show impressive reenactment results but with limit-
ing runtime performance due to the underlying coordinate-based
representation. Mixture of Volumetric Primitives (MVP) [Lombardi
et al. 2021] is a hybrid cube-based primitive model attached to a base
mesh that renders head avatars in real-time at 1k resolution. TRA-
vatar [Yang et al. 2023] builds upon MVP and uses a multispectral
Lighstage to reconstruct animatable relightable avatars. Unlike pre-
vious multi-view volumetric approaches [Lombardi et al. 2021; Yang
et al. 2023], our 3D Gaussian-based approach works with sparser
camera rigs and simpler lighting setups. It also renders dynamic
heads much faster thanks to its rasterization-based rendering ap-
proach and several important design choices. Such choices include a
novel efficient vertex decoder and an efficient decoder-only architec-
ture for predicting the properties of Gaussian primitives. Due to the
efficiency and rendering quality of 3D Gaussian Splats, research has
quickly shifted its attention back to more explicit point representa-
tions, modeled as 3D displacements in the mesh surface space [Ma
et al. 2024; Qian et al. 2024; Rivero et al. 2024; Xu et al. 2024] or UV
mesh space [Lan et al. 2023; Pang et al. 2024; Saito et al. 2024a] of
a base mesh or parametric model (e.g., FLAME [Feng et al. 2021]).
Such representations allow for dynamic facial control via latent
codes [Saito et al. 2024a] or expression parameters [Qian et al. 2024],
while facial appearance can be conditioned on text-prompts [Zhou
et al. 2024]. Unlike concurrent multi-view work [Qian et al. 2024;
Saito et al. 2024a; Xu et al. 2024], we propose an end-to-end, coarse-
to-fine deformation strategy that allows us to better estimate rigid
mesh alignment, which in turn improves the alignment of Gaussians
over the head surface, resulting in higher-quality renderings.
2.3.2
Template-free Approaches. Template-free approaches are not
limited by the representation capacity of the underlying 3DMM
template. Here, methods such as Nerfies [Park et al. 2021a] and
HyperNeRF [Park et al. 2021b] use an implicitly learned canonical
space to model dynamic scenes captured from a moving monoc-
ular camera. LatentAvatar [Xu et al. 2023b] learns implicit latent
expression codes between shared and person-specific settings for
cross-actor reenactment applications, thus improving tracking and
expression transfer. NeRFSemble [Kirschstein et al. 2023] propose a
multi-view solution for reconstructing dynamic human heads us-
ing a learned blending of multi-resolution hash grids. While the
methods above produce good results, their formulation does not ex-
tend beyond scene-replay, thus lacking controllability. GAN-based
methods [Chan et al. 2022] have shown improvements in recon-
struction quality and view consistency. Thus, they have been used
in downstream avatar-based applications [Trevithick et al. 2023].
HQ3DAvatar [Teotia et al. 2024] is a more recent method that
conditions a canonical space on expression features for photoreal-
istic moving face synthesis. The method is constrained using op-
tical flow in a hash-grid radiance field framework [Müller et al.
2022]. HQ3DAvatar produces high-fidelity reconstruction results
and shows clear improvements over several existing methods, in-
cluding MVP [Lombardi et al. 2021] and other multi-view extensions,
such as HyperNeRF [Park et al. 2021b] and NeRFBlendShape [Gao
et al. 2022]. However, HQ3DAvatar struggles to reproduce details
in regions undergoing strong deformations. Our approach bene-
fits from the dense template mesh as a prior, yet it can flexibly
deviate away from regions not covered by the underlying template.
Such trade-off results in highly accurate renderings and real-time
inference speeds, as demonstrated by extensive experiments.
3
METHOD
Our goal is to produce photorealistic, 3D-consistent moving heads
at real-time rendering speeds. We use 3D Gaussians [Kerbl et al.
2023] as the base representation, and introduce several novel losses
and design choices to ensure fast rendering and high-quality re-
constructions. Our method, illustrated in Fig. 2, utilizes data from a
subject’s multi-view facial performance, captured with 24 cameras
sparsely distributed around the entire head. Such data supervises
our end-to-end learning framework, which employs a coarse-to-fine
strategy to capture head movements and detailed facial expressions
accurately. To train our method, we track FLAME [Li et al. 2017] pa-
rameters for each frame using a multi-view facial landmarks-based
tracking implementation from Shimada et al. [2023]. At test time,
our method requires a forward pass through the trained encoders
and decoders to render the subject. Our method has an image en-
coder that separates input images into a local animation code and
global transformations. The animation code drives deformations on
top of a template mesh, which is then posed using the global trans-
formation parameters. 3D Gaussians initialized on this posed mesh
are refined to capture fine-scale details. The same animation code
also drives the learning of opacity and RGB values. The Gaussian
properties, as well as the RGB and opacity values, are learned in
the 2D UV space of the template mesh, enabling the use of efficient
CNN-based decoders. This, combined with the fast rasterization of


4
•
Kartik Teotia, Hyeongwoo Kim, Pablo Garrido, Marc Habermann, Mohamed Elgharib, and Christian Theobalt
Fig. 2. Method Overview. Multi-view driving images are provided as input, and an image encoder extracts the animation code (Zexp) and global head pose
parameters (Rrigid Trigid). The animation code is fed into a vertex deformer network to generate per-vertex displacements (𝛿𝑣) relative to a canonical template
mesh in a rest pose with vertices 𝑣𝑡, resulting in an expression-dependent deformed mesh with vertices 𝑣𝑑. This is then globally transformed to a posed mesh
with vertices 𝑣𝑝using the head pose parameters (Rrigid Trigid). 3D Gaussians with positions (pin), scales (sin), and rotations (rin) are initialized on the globally
transformed deformed mesh. The deltas decoder predicts deformation for position (𝛿𝑝), rotation (𝛿𝑟), and scale (𝛿𝑠) to refine the initialized 3D Gaussians. We
employ two decoders to predict per-Gaussian RGB color and opacity aligned to the UV map of the template. 3D Gaussian Splatting projects the deformed
Gaussians into the image plane, resulting in the rendered image. The pipeline is trained end-to-end using multi-view RGB images, expression tracking data,
and rigid head pose tracking data. During testing, only a feedforward pass of the input is required to drive the global rigid head pose and facial expressions.
3D Gaussian Splatting [Kerbl et al. 2023], enables real-time infer-
ence. Notably, our method requires no explicit global rigid pose as
an additional input, just the driving images during testing. Thus,
it is more robust to jitter, which is usually introduced by explicit
global rigid pose-tracking. In this section, we first lay out the image
formation process via 3D Gaussian Splatting (Sec. 3.1). Then, we
describe our method in more detail, including our encoding strategy
(Sec. 3.2), our coarse-to-fine learning scheme (Sec. 3.3), the proposed
efficient decoders (Sec. 3.4), and finally the objective functions (Sec.
3.5).
3.1
Preliminaries: 3D Gaussian Splatting
We adopt the image formation model from 3D Gaussian Splat-
ting [Kerbl et al. 2023], which represents the scene using 3D Gauss-
ian primitives. Each Gaussian primitive is represented by a 3×3
covariance matrix 𝚺centered at mean position p as follows:
𝑔(x) = 𝑒−1
2 (x−p)𝑇𝚺−1(x−p) .
(1)
The covariance matrix is parameterized by a rotation matrix R
and a scaling matrix S to constrain it to be positive semi-definite:
Σ = RSSTRT
(2)
where R and S are the matrix representations of the learnable quater-
nion r and the 3D scaling s vectors, respectively. Then, the 3D Gaus-
sians are projected onto screen space using EWA Splatting [Zwicker
et al. 2002] as follows:
Σ′ = JWΣWTJT
(3)
where Σ′is a projected 2×2 covariance matrix. J′ ∈R2×3 denotes
the Jacobian of the affine-approximated projective transformation
matrix and W ∈R3×3 is the viewing transformation. Finally, the
pixel-space rendered color C𝑟is computed using point-based ren-
dering [Kerbl et al. 2023]:
C𝑟=
∑︁
𝑖∈N
𝑐𝑖𝑎𝑖
𝑖−1
Ö
𝑗=1
(1 −𝑎𝑗) .
(4)
Here, N denotes the total number of ordered points. 𝑐𝑖represents
the per-Gaussian decoded color, and 𝑎𝑖represent the result of multi-
plying the covariance matrix Σ′with the the per-Gaussian decoded
opacity 𝑜𝑖, respectively.
3.2
Encoding
Unlike 3D Gaussian Splatting [Kerbl et al. 2023], which was orig-
inally proposed to model static scenes, we aim to control the 3D
Gaussians based on RGB images as input. To this end, we introduce
an encoder E𝛾that takes in Id = 3 multi-view RGB images as input
to encode the facial appearance and the global rigid head pose from
varying viewpoints. The encoder is designed to encode the changes
in local dynamics like facial expression changes via an animation
code Zexp ∈R256 and global transformations, separately. Our choice


GaussianHeads: End-to-End Learning of Drivable Gaussian Head Avatars from Coarse-to-fine Representations
•
5
Fig. 3. Coarse-to-fine Learning. We refine the FLAME shape-fitted mesh
by an initial registration step (b), which results in the template mesh with
vertices 𝑣𝑡used in our framework. (c) The template mesh is deformed based
on the input and posed to the world space using the global transforma-
tion parameters. We initialize the 3D Gaussians on the rigidly translated
deformed mesh with vertices and refine their properties through our Coarse-
to-Fine framework, resulting in dense, head surface-aligned 3D Gaussians
(d). The 3D Gaussians are splatted, resulting in the render (e), which is
supervised with ground truth image (f).
of encoding multi-view RGB images is similar to related works that
encode expressions via multi-view RGB images [Lombardi et al. 2018,
2021; Wang et al. 2021; Yang et al. 2023]. Additionally, the encoder
outputs rigid transformation parameters, where the rotation matrix
Rrigid lies in SO(3), and the translation vector Trigid belongs to R3.
The encoder has separate branches for the animation code and the
rigid transformation parameters. The rotation output is normalized
to ensure it lies on the unit sphere, representing a unit quaternion.
While TRAvatar [Tran et al. 2019] shares a similar design choice of
predicting the global transformation parameters, we find the need
in our framework for constraining these parameters via a landmark
alignment loss as weak supervision to guide the positioning of the
rigid head pose, as discussed in Sec. 3.5.
3.3
Coarse-to-fine Learning Framework
Our method leverages a coarse-to-fine framework for deforming
a template mesh. It first initializes the 3D Gaussians and then re-
fines the positions of the Gaussians. This hierarchical approach is
imperative to our high-fidelity results, as discussed in Sec. 4.2. The
coarse step handles the large vertex-level deformations that result
from extreme or exaggerated facial expressions. The fine deforma-
tion step then refines these changes, allowing for capturing the
more fine-scale or intricate details like the teeth. Fig. 3 provides a
high-level overview of the coarse-to-fine framework.
3.3.1
Coarse Step. Before training, we first register the FLAME-
fitted mesh on the first frame of the sequence to multi-view RGB
images of the subject. Sec. A.1 presents the details of this template
mesh generation step. To deform the template mesh to match the
subject’s expression closely, we utilize a per-vertex offset prediction
network Dv. This network takes the animation code Zexp as input
and decodes per-vertex offsets 𝛿𝑣on top of a neutral expression
template mesh Mtemplate with vertices vt. This results in deformed
vertices vd as follows:
vd = vd + 𝛿𝑣.
(5)
The deformed mesh Md with vertices vd shares the same topology as
FLAME [Li et al. 2017], with a total of 5023 vertices. Since the num-
ber of vertices is fairly small, we employ a lightweight MLP-based
architecture to learn the per-vertex offsets on top of the template
vertices vt. The vertices of the deformed mesh are then rigidly posed
to the world space using the estimated global rigid rotation Rrigid
and translation Rrigid as follows:
vp = Rrigid(vd) + Trigid .
(6)
This global transformation results in the posed mesh Mp, defined
by vertices vp.
3.3.2
3D Gaussian Initialization. We initialize NG 3D Gaussians
on the posed mesh Mp. To do so, we first uniformly sample on the
UV space of the template mesh at a resolution of 512 × 512. This
allows for sampling NG = N2g 3D Gaussians in 2D space, where
Ng corresponds to the spatial resolution in the x and y direction of
the UV map. Once sampled, each Gaussian is assigned a position
pin, rotation rin, and scale sin. The position pin is the interpolated
vertex position on the deformed mesh, computed using barycentric
interpolation on the UV map. For the first frame, the scales are
initialized according to a distance transform-based technique akin
to 3D Gaussian Splatting [Kerbl et al. 2023], which serves as the
initial scale reference sin. The initial rotations rin are set to zero. We
apply a binary mask that filters out the samples that do not lie on
the UV parameterization of the template mesh.
3.3.3
Fine Step. A 2D CNN-based decoder Dm is used to decode
the animation code Zexp into deltas (𝛿𝑝,𝛿𝑟,𝛿𝑠), which represent
the offsets in positions, rotations, and scales with respect to the
initialized Gaussian primitives. Thus, we predict the positions p =
pin + 𝛿𝑝, rotations r = rin + 𝛿𝑟, and scales s = sin + 𝛿𝑠for the 3D
Gaussians. We use a 2D CNN to generate the deltas in a grid of size
NG ×NG ×10. This grid corresponds to the primitives sampled in the
UV map. The position offsets 𝛿𝑝represent the fine-level deformation
of facial structures showing fine-grained features, such as facial hair
and mouth interior, as these offsets allow for 3D Gaussians to be
placed in these regions.
3.4
Gaussian Opacity and Color Decoding
To achieve real-time and high-fidelity renderings, it is crucial to
decode the opacity and appearance information of each 3D Gauss-
ian efficiently. This is achieved through computationally efficient
decoders that translate the animation code into per-Gaussian prop-
erties, capturing both the opacity and RGB color information. Our
approach leverages 2D CNNs for efficient decoding of both RGB and
opacity values. This design choice is similar to several concurrent
works [Jiang et al. 2024; Pang et al. 2023; Saito et al. 2024b].


6
•
Kartik Teotia, Hyeongwoo Kim, Pablo Garrido, Marc Habermann, Mohamed Elgharib, and Christian Theobalt
3.4.1
Opacity Decoder. The animation code Zexp is decoded into a
2D opacity map O of size NG × NG × 1 using Do. Each value on the
grid represents the per-Gaussian opacity oi.
3.4.2
RGB Decoder. The animation code Zexp, along with the object-
centric view direction v, is decoded into a 2D color map NG ×NG ×3
using DRGB. Each value on the decoded grid represents the per-
Gaussian RGB color ci. Note that the view direction v is introduced
to represent view-dependent appearance effects.
3.5
Objective Function
Given the above representation, we learn the encoder Egamma and
the decoders Dv, Do, DRGB, and Dm in an end-to-end manner us-
ing multi-view image supervision. For this, we optimize for the
following objective function:
L = 𝜆1L1 + 𝜆2LSSIM + 𝜆3Lgeo + 𝜆4Lperc
+ 𝜆5Ltemp + 𝜆6Llmk + 𝜆7Lreg .
(7)
Here, L1 denotes the difference between the rendered RGB image
Ir and ground truth RGB image Ig. The perceptual distance, Lperc,
is based on a pretrained VGG network [Simonyan and Zisserman
2015]. Similar to [Cao et al. 2022], we take 4 random patches of size
500×500 pixels from the ground truth and rendered image pair to
compute the perceptual distance. LSSIM denotes the structural simi-
larity measure [Wang et al. 2004a]. To supervise the deformed mesh
Md with vertices vd, we employ an L2 loss between the deformed
vertices vd and the tracked vertices vs as follows: the space before
the
Lgeo(vd, vs) = 1
Nv
Nv
∑︁
𝑖=1
(vd[𝑖] −vs[𝑖])2 ,
(8)
where Nv represents the number of vertices. Lgeo allows the vertices
to move freely towards more deformable regions like the mouth
interior while remaining close to the tracked vertices vt. This acts
as a soft prior to preserve the structure of the face. We further use a
spatial regularization term Lreg that ensures stable training. Lreg is
implemented as the summation of L1 penalties for scales s, Gaussian
mean position offsets𝛿𝑝, and Gaussian rotations offsets𝛿𝑟: the space
before the
Lreg =
1
NG
NG
∑︁
𝑖=1
(|s𝑖| + |𝛿𝑝𝑖| + |𝛿𝑟𝑖|)
(9)
Here, NG represents the total number of Gaussians. In addition, we
employ a landmark constraint Llmk to supervise the global trans-
formation. This constraint ensures that the rigid landmarks of the
face align with the rigid landmarks of the rigidly tracked head pose
mesh Mr, which is at neutral expression.
Llmk = 1
NL
NL
∑︁
𝑖=1
Mp,i −Mr,i

(10)
Here, NL is the total number of rigid landmarks. Mp,i represents
the 𝑖-th rigid landmark of the posed mesh Mp and Mr,i denotes the
corresponding 𝑖-th rigid landmark of the rigidly tracked mesh Mr at
a neutral expression. Finally, we employ a temporal smoothness loss
Ltemp between two consecutive frames at time 𝑡and 𝑡+1, defined on
the Gaussian offsets predicted by the deltas decoder Dm as follows:
Ltemp =
1
NG
NG
∑︁
𝑖=1
 𝛿𝑝(𝑡+1)
𝑖
−𝛿𝑝(𝑡)
𝑖
 +
𝛿s(𝑡+1)
i
−𝛿s(𝑡)
i

+
𝛿𝑟(𝑡+1)
𝑖
−𝛿𝑟(𝑡)
𝑖


(11)
In our experiments, we set 𝜆1 = 0.8, 𝜆2 = 0.2, 𝜆3 = 0.1, 𝜆4 = 0.01,
𝜆5 = 0.1, 𝜆6 = 0.8, and 𝜆7 = 0.1.
3.6
Implementation Details
We train our method for 300k iterations on a single NVIDIA 𝐴40
GPU, which takes around 24 hours. We adopt the Adam optimizer
[Kingma and Ba 2015] for estimating the optimal parameters of
our learning-based framework. We set the learning rate to 1𝑒−4 for
Dv. The Opacity decoder Do and RGB decoder DRGB are trained
with a learning rate of 6𝑒−4, while the image encoder E𝛾is trained
with a learning rate of 5𝑒−4. The delta decoder Dm is trained with
a learning rate of 1𝑒−4. We use NL = 4 rigid landmarks (2 for each
eye) to supervise the landmark alignment. In our framework, the
view direction v is calculated as the mean position of the subject’s
head defined by the posed mesh Mp with vertices vp subtracted by
the camera viewpoint center.
4
EXPERIMENTS
Fig. 4. Qualitative Results. Novel view synthesis at virtual camera paths
for different subjects. Our method excels at representing fine details, such
as facial hair and fine scalp hair strands.
Our method produces photorealistic moving heads under novel
viewpoints and with unseen expressions. This section discusses the
various experiments we have performed to examine our method.
We show results on multiple participants recorded in a multi-view
facial performance capture rig. Unless stated otherwise, all our ex-
periments used for evaluations are trained with 23 cameras, sparsely
distributed over the entire head. We hold out 1 camera for evalua-
tion. Furthermore, the default resolution used in our experiments is
960 × 540, unless stated otherwise. We show qualitative and quan-
titative comparisons on 4 subjects performing challenging facial
expressions, which includes 1 subject from the NeRSemble dataset


GaussianHeads: End-to-End Learning of Drivable Gaussian Head Avatars from Coarse-to-fine Representations
•
7
Fig. 5. Qualitative Results. Expression synthesis from a novel camera
viewpoint. Our approach can synthesize challenging expressions and mo-
tions, such as the tongue sticking out.
[Kirschstein et al. 2023]. We hold out 300 frames for both quanti-
tative and qualitative evaluation unless stated otherwise. We first
show qualitative results for a wide variety of sequences (Sec. 4.1).
Through quantitative and qualitative analysis, we highlight the
important design choices of our method (Sec. 4.2) and perform com-
parisons against related work, namely MVP [Lombardi et al. 2021],
GaussianAvatars [Qian et al. 2024], and HQ3DAvatar [Teotia et al.
2024]. For image sequence results, please refer to the supplemental
video.
4.1
Qualitative Results
Fig. 6. Ablation Study. Left to right: Without coarse deformations, without
fine deformations, without rigid landmark alignment loss Llmk, ours, and
Ground Truth. The highlighted regions show expression alignment in the
mouth region. We observe that our design choices result in high-quality
details in the mouth interior. Note: Best viewed if zoomed in or in the
supplementary video.
Fig. 4 shows turntable renderings generated by our approach.
Fig. 5 shows novel expressions synthesized for 2 different subjects
at a holdout camera viewpoint. Our results show high-quality view
synthesis, as well as novel expression synthesis. We also show an
Table 1. Analysis of our core design choices. We outperform the baseline
approaches in quantitative metrics.
Metrics
No Coarse Def.
No Fine Def.
No Llmk
Ours
PSNR ↑
32.95
32.91
33.08
33.91
L1 ↓
7.44
7.56
7.41
4.93
SSIM ↑
0.80
0.80
0.80
0.85
LPIPS ↓
0.13
0.13
0.11
0.11
application that demonstrates that our model can work with inputs
from a parametric face tracker [Li et al. 2017] in the supplementary
video.
4.2
Ablative Analysis
Fig. 7. Ablation Study. Left to right: Without perceptual loss,without vertex
loss Lgeo, and ours. The highlighted regions show expression alignment in
the mouth region. Note that using a perceptual loss term leads to sharper
facial hair and tongue reconstructions, while Lgeo helps with detailed ex-
pression alignment.
Fig. 8. Ablation Study. Left to right: Without Ltemp, ours, and Ground
Truth. Ltemp helps reproduce details in structures undergoing large motion
changes like teeth.


8
•
Kartik Teotia, Hyeongwoo Kim, Pablo Garrido, Marc Habermann, Mohamed Elgharib, and Christian Theobalt
Fig. 9. Ablation Study. Left to right: 1 input driving view, 2 input driving
views, ours (3 input driving views), and Ground Truth. We observe that our
choice of driving the avatar with an image-triplet leads to overall better
expression alignment.
Fig. 10. Ablation Study. Left to Right: Without scale initialization, RGCA (-
-), using combined decoders for 3D Gaussian geometry properties, ours, and
Ground Truth. Our design choice generates sharper results in deformable
regions like the mouth.
Table 2. Ablation Study: Quantitative evaluation of temporal loss term
Ltemp, perceptual loss term Lperc, and vertex loss Lgeo. Our method attains
the best numerical performance on almost all metrics (see bold numbers).
Metrics
Without Ltemp
Without Lperc
Without Lgeo
Ours
PSNR ↑
33.64
33.08
32.98
33.91
L1 ↓
4.88
7.37
7.35
4.93
SSIM ↑
0.85
0.81
0.80
0.85
LPIPS ↓
0.11
0.15
0.11
0.11
Table 3. Analysis of the number of input driving views. We observe that
driving with more input views increasingly improves head avatar synthesis.
Metrics
1 input view
2 input views
Ours (3 input views)
PSNR ↑
30.94
31.78
33.11
L1 ↓
15.52
9.38
5.58
SSIM ↑
0.67
0.75
0.83
We ablate the main components as well as loss terms employed
in our approach. The ablation study in Fig. 6 demonstrates the im-
portance of our core components. Without coarse deformation, the
model struggles to recover the structure in the mouth interior. With-
out fine deformation, the model still lacks fine-grained detail of
Table 4. Ablation Study: Quantitative evaluation with combined decoders
for predicting Gaussian properties, RGCA (- -), and without using scale
initialization. Our method attains the best numerical performance (see bold
numbers).
Metrics
Combined Decoders
RGCA (- -)
No Scale Init.
Ours
PSNR ↑
34.25
34.11
33.80
34.79
L1 ↓
4.80
4.95
5.29
3.91
SSIM ↑
0.86
0.86
0.85
0.87
LPIPS ↓
0.10
0.12
0.11
0.10
facial structures, such as the teeth. Without landmark alignment
loss Llmk, the model misaligns expressions in the mouth. Our model
successfully captures the details in the mouth interior at a high
quality. Fig. 7 shows the impact of the perceptual loss term Lperc
and the per-vertex loss term Lgeo. The absence of Lperc results in
overall blurry face renderings. Lgeo helps with expression alignment
in regions undergoing large deformations, e.g., the mouth. Fig. 8
highlights the impact of temporal loss Ltemp. We find that Ltemp
helps preserve fine-scale details of structures undergoing motion
across time, such as the teeth. Table 1 shows the average image-
based quality assessment metric scores. We use PSNR, SSIM [Wang
et al. 2004b], L1 distance, and LPIPS distance [Zhang et al. 2018]
as the image-based quality assessment metrics. The scores are av-
eraged over the holdout frames for 2 subjects. Numerical results
show that our design choices are well-validated. Tab. 2 shows a
quantitative evaluation for different design choices, including the
use of the temporal loss term Ltemp, the perceptual loss term Lperc,
and the vertex loss term Lgeo. We observe that our final method, and
our method without Ltemp performs on par on quantitative metrics
as its effects are more apparent during abrupt facial deformations.
Quantitative evaluations focusing solely on the mouth region show
improvements in the L1 metric (7.27 with the temporal loss and 7.41
without). To quantify the temporal stability for Ltemp, we run the
JOD metric [Mantiuk et al. 2021] with and without Ltemp in place,
which yields superior results when using the proposed loss term
(7.10 with the temporal loss vs 7.04 without), where a higher num-
ber suggests better quality. Fig. 9 provides a qualitative comparison
on the design choice of using 3 input driving views on Subject 1’s
data. We observe that our design choice of using an image-triplet to
encode the facial expressions leads to overall better results. Fig. 10
shows a qualitative comparison for different baselines. They include
no initialization for Gaussian scales, our implementation of RGCA
decoders [Saito et al. 2024a], combined decoders for Gaussian opac-
ity and offset values, and ours. We remark that, unlike our method,
RGCA utilizes combined decoders for Gaussian opacity and offset
values. We observe that our results reproduce sharper details around
the mouth interior than those obtained by the other approaches.
Tab. 4 compares the same baselines against our approach on Subject
SNeRSemble1 and supports our qualitative results.
4.3
Comparisons
We compare our real-time multi-view dynamic head generation
method against three multi-view techniques: HQ3DAvatar [Teo-
tia et al. 2024], GaussianAvatars [Qian et al. 2024], and Mixture of


GaussianHeads: End-to-End Learning of Drivable Gaussian Head Avatars from Coarse-to-fine Representations
•
9
Fig. 11. Qualitative comparisons with the related methods. Top to bottom: Subject 1, Subject 2, Subject SNeRSemble1, and Subject 3. Left to right: HQ3DAvatar
[Teotia et al. 2024], GaussianAvatrars [Qian et al. 2024], MVP [Lombardi et al. 2021], and Ours. Note that yellow boxes highlight the detail reproduction with
respect to the ground truth. Our method produces crisper details in the mouth interior and hair.


10
•
Kartik Teotia, Hyeongwoo Kim, Pablo Garrido, Marc Habermann, Mohamed Elgharib, and Christian Theobalt
Fig. 12. Qualitative comparison on a speech sequence. Our method
results in overall better mouth-region synthesis.
Table 5. Quantitative comparison with related approaches. We out-
perform the related methods numerically on several image-quality metrics
(see bold text).
Metrics
HQ3DAvatar
GaussianAvatars
MVP
Ours
PSNR ↑
30.78
32.22
32.50
32.89
L1 ↓
13.68
8.90
9.03
7.33
SSIM ↑
0.77
0.79
0.78
0.81
LPIPS ↓
0.14
0.15
0.15
0.11
Volumetric Primitives (MVP) [Lombardi et al. 2021]. Notably, Gaus-
sianAvatars [Qian et al. 2024], MVP [Lombardi et al. 2021], and our
method operate in real time. HQ3DAvatar employs an implicitly
learned canonical radiance field, while GaussianAvatars registers
3D Gaussians on a tracked mesh. MVP uses ray-marching through
cubic volumetric primitives on a template mesh. MVP [Lombardi
et al. 2021] and our approach can work with RGB images as input,
whereas Gaussian Avatars [Qian et al. 2024] is designed to work
with a parametric face model. Fig. 11 presents qualitative reconstruc-
tion comparisons. HQ3DAvatar [Teotia et al. 2024], GaussianAvatars
[Qian et al. 2024], and MVP [Lombardi et al. 2021] struggle with topo-
logical changes, fine-scale hair details, dental features, and beard
textures, often producing blurry and less defined results. In contrast,
our method captures these details more accurately and sharply, as
evidenced by the sharper representation of the tongue (top row),
fine hair-strand structure (second row), clear dental features (third
row), and distinct beard textures (bottom row). Table 5 shows the
quantitative performance of our approach against MVP [Lombardi
et al. 2021] and HQ3DAvatar [Teotia et al. 2024] averaged over hold-
out frames for 4 subjects. We observe that for the image-quality
assessment metrics, our method shows the best numerical perfor-
mance.
Fig. 12 shows a qualitative comparison of our method against the
different baselines for a speech sequence trained on a subject speak-
ing phonetically balanced sentences. We observe that our approach
outperforms baseline methods in terms of image synthesis quality,
especially for the mouth region.
5
LIMITATIONS AND FUTURE WORK
Fig. 13. Failure Case. Left to right: Our rendering and Ground Truth. Our
model produces ghosting artifacts for subtle movements in the eye region.
While our method clearly sets the state of the art for human
head avatar rendering in terms of speed and photorealism, it still
has certain limitations. First, the image encoder takes the entire
