Title: VOODOO XP: Expressive One-Shot Head Reenactment for VR Telepresence

VOODOO XP: Expressive One-Shot Head Reenactment for VR
Telepresence
PHONG TRAN, Mohamed Bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence, UAE
EGOR ZAKHAROV, ETH Zurich, Switzerland
LONG-NHAT HO, Mohamed Bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence, UAE
LIWEN HU, Pinscreen, USA
ADILBEK KARMANOV, Mohamed Bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence, UAE
AVIRAL AGARWAL, Pinscreen, USA
MCLEAN GOLDWHITE, Pinscreen, USA
ARIANA BERMUDEZ VENEGAS, Mohamed Bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence, UAE
ANH TUAN TRAN, VinAI Research, Vietnam
HAO LI, Pinscreen, MBZUAI, USA
source
driver
reenactment
novel views
VR Telepresence
webcam
Fig. 1. We introduce VOODOO XP, an expressive 3D-aware head reenactment system. Our method successfully transfers the driver’s expressions to the
source and produces view-consistent renderings, covering a wide range of head poses and highly dynamic and extreme expressions from the input driver.
Thanks to the real-time capability of our method, we also demonstrate our solution in a live monocular webcam setting and an end-to-end VR telepresence
system for two-way communication. Please see the supplement video for the live demonstration.
We introduce VOODOO XP: a 3D-aware one-shot head reenactment method
that can generate highly expressive facial expressions from any input driver
video and a single 2D portrait. Our solution is real-time, view-consistent,
and can be instantly used without calibration or fine-tuning. We demon-
strate our solution on a monocular video setting and an end-to-end VR
telepresence system for two-way communication. Compared to 2D head
reenactment methods, 3D-aware approaches aim to preserve the identity
Authors’ Contact Information: Phong Tran, the.tran@mbzuai.ac.ae, Mohamed Bin Za-
yed University of Artificial Intelligence, UAE; Egor Zakharov, ETH Zurich, Switzerland,
ezakharov@ethz.ch; Long-Nhat Ho, Mohamed Bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelli-
gence, UAE, long.ho@mbzuai.ac.ae; Liwen Hu, Pinscreen, USA, liwen@pinscreen.com;
Adilbek Karmanov, Mohamed Bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence, UAE,
adilbek.karmanov@mbzuai.ac.ae; Aviral Agarwal, Pinscreen, USA, aviral@pinscreen.
com; McLean Goldwhite, Pinscreen, USA, lain@pinscreen.com; Ariana Bermudez Vene-
gas, Mohamed Bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence, UAE, ariana.venegas@
mbzuai.ac.ae; Anh Tuan Tran, VinAI Research, Vietnam, anhtt152@vinai.io; Hao Li,
Pinscreen, MBZUAI, USA, hao@hao-li.com.
of the subject and ensure view-consistent facial geometry for novel camera
poses, which makes them suitable for immersive applications. While vari-
ous facial disentanglement techniques have been introduced, cutting-edge
3D-aware neural reenactment techniques still lack expressiveness and fail
to reproduce complex and fine-scale facial expressions. We present a novel
cross-reenactment architecture that directly transfers the driver’s facial ex-
pressions to transformer blocks of the input source’s 3D lifting module. We
show that highly effective disentanglement is possible using an innovative
multi-stage self-supervision approach, which is based on a coarse-to-fine
strategy, combined with an explicit face neutralization and 3D lifted frontal-
ization during its initial training stage. We further integrate our novel head
reenactment solution into an accessible high-fidelity VR telepresence system,
where any person can instantly build a personalized neural head avatar from
any photo and bring it to life using the headset. We demonstrate state-of-
the-art performance in terms of expressiveness and likeness preservation
on a large set of diverse subjects and capture conditions.
arXiv:2405.16204v2  [cs.CV]  28 May 2024


2
•
Tran et al.
CCS Concepts: • Computing methodologies →Image-based rendering.
Additional Key Words and Phrases: View Synthesis, Facial Animation, Neural
Radiance Field
1
INTRODUCTION
Virtual and augmented reality has the potential to displace tra-
ditional 2D video conferencing and facilitate fully immersive 3D
communication in virtual worlds and remote spatial collaboration.
The latest consumer AR/VR headsets (e.g., Apple’s Vision Pro [Apple
2024], Meta Quest Pro [Meta 2022]), all support built-in real-time
face tracking capabilities [Li et al. 2015; Lombardi et al. 2018; Ma
et al. 2021; Olszewski et al. 2016; Wei et al. 2019], which can enable
engaging social face-to-face interactions using 3D avatars. Those
avatars are typically built as a separate process without the user
wearing the HMD using an authoring tool, from scans or videos
swiped around a face, or by uploading a photo. While most VR ap-
plications (e.g., Meta Horizon) are based on conventional graphics
rendering of 3D avatars, Apple’s Persona uses a 2D neural rendering
approach and a face scanning procedure to make the creation of
realistic avatars easier.
Despite the steady progress of real-time game engines, such as
Unreal [Epic Games 2024a] and Unity [Unity 2024], and their capa-
bilities of rendering highly quality digital humans (e.g., MetaHuman
Creator [Epic Games 2024b]), achieving realism for personalized
avatars, using such graphics pipeline, typically relies on professional
scans, complex facial rig adjustment, and careful shader/lighting
tweaks for individual scenes. On the other hand, neural rendering
approaches are gaining popularity as they ensure the generation of
photorealistic faces and expressions using models trained directly
from real world data. High-end neural rendering systems such as
Meta’s avatar codec model [Lombardi et al. 2018; Ma et al. 2021; Wei
et al. 2019] a personalized head avatar using a complex multi-view
video capture system or a number of 3D facial scans obtained from
a handheld device [Cao et al. 2022]. The process, however, generally
involves tedious recording sessions, as well as a lengthy optimiza-
tion process (hours to days), which makes it not yet suitable for
deployment in everyday environments.
A number of one-shot neural head reenactment methods have
shown that high-fidelity facial expressions and poses can be gener-
ated instantly from a single portrait using a driver video by training
a generative model using large image/video datasets [Burkov et al.
2020; Doukas et al. 2021; Drobyshev et al. 2022; Gao et al. 2023; Hong
et al. 2022b; Ji et al. 2022; Ren et al. 2021; Siarohin et al. 2019a,b, 2021;
Song et al. 2021c; Tao et al. 2022; Wang et al. 2021a, 2022b; Wiles et al.
2018; Xiang et al. 2020; Yin et al. 2022; Zakharov et al. 2020, 2019;
Zhang et al. 2023; Zhao and Zhang 2022]. However for real-time 2D
methods, the identity and expressions can deviate drastically from
the input, especially when a novel view is rendered that is different
from the driver video, which is the case for VR telepresence. Lately,
several 3D-aware head reenactment methods have been introduced
and use neural radiance fields combined with a disentanglement
approach for identity, expressions, and pose to achieve consistent
renderings from novel views [An et al. 2023; Chan et al. 2022, 2021;
Deng et al. 2022; Ki et al. 2024; Li et al. 2023a; Niemeyer and Geiger
2021; Or-El et al. 2022; Schwarz et al. 2020; Skorokhodov et al. 2022;
Tran et al. 2024; Xiang et al. 2023; Xu et al. 2023a,b; Xue et al. 2022;
Ye et al. 2024]. Due to the volumetric nature of neural fields, such
disentanglement is particularly challenging, and despite the most
recent efforts based on either 3D morphable models [Li et al. 2023a],
3D lifted frontalization techniques [Tran et al. 2024], or multi-modal
training-based expression encoder [Deng et al. 2024b,a], the reen-
acted faces struggle with complex face/lip movement, as well as
asymmetric expressions.
Expressive faces are important for conveying emotions and pro-
ducing natural lip movements during speech in social interactions.
To this end, we propose a real-time 3D head reenactment approach
called VOODOO XP, which can generate highly expressive faces
and view-consistent renderings given a single unconstrained input
portrait (source), a monocular video performance of the same or
different person (driver), as well as an arbitrary camera pose. Ad-
ditionally, we also introduce the first end-to-end VR telepresence
system for two-way face-to-face communication based on a one-
shot head reenactment technology and the Meta Quest Pro HMD.
The user first takes a picture with a webcam or picks an arbitrary 2D
portrait as the source, and after wearing the VR headset, the user can
instantly drive the face of its neural head avatar and communicate
immersively with a second person.
Similar to the state-of-the-art neural head reenactment approach,
VOODOO 3D [Tran et al. 2024], our method performs a fully vol-
umetric disentanglement for identity, expressions, and pose using
a 3D lifted frontalization network. However, instead of 3D lifting
the driver’s face and extracting its expressions, we directly transfer
the expression signal to transformer blocks of the 3D lifting mod-
ule used for the source portrait. For an effective disentanglement
and extraction of the driver’s expression, we present a multi-stage
self-supervised learning approach, in which the first stage uses an
explicit neutralization and 3D lifted frontalization for training, fol-
lowed by less restrictive but higher resolution fine-scale training,
and global fine-tunine step. We demonstrate extreme facial expres-
sions such as face squeezing, complex lip movements, asymmetric
facial poses, and fine-scale wrinkles that are particularly challenging
for other methods. It is worth noting that our method can synthesize
tongues as well as correct eyebrow movements behind glass frames.
While we proposed a one-shot technique, our system naturally
supports few-shot fine-tuning as an optional step. In case additional
sources images are available, more faithful avatars can be obtained
in tens of seconds. We show how our system achieves superior
reenactment in terms of expressiveness, fidelity, and identity preser-
vation compared to the current state-of-the-art on various datasets
and a wide range of examples. We also demonstrate the performance
and robustness of our one-shot reenactment technique on an inte-
grated, immersive telepresence system for two-way communication
using VR headsets. We make the following contributions:
• We introduce a novel 3D-aware neural head reenactment
architecture using a transformer-based expression transfer
approach for generating highly expressive facial expressions
in real-time.
• For effective volumetric disentanglement of complex expres-
sions, we propose a multi-stage training approach based on


VOODOO XP: Expressive One-Shot Head Reenactment for VR Telepresence
•
3
face neutralization and 3D lifted frontalization, coarse-to-
fine training, and global fine-tuning.
• We present the first end-to-end VR telepresence solution
based on a one-shot 3D head reenactment algorithm.
2
RELATED WORK
For today’s VFX, gaming, and VR/AR applications, the standard
for rendering 3D avatars consists of using a conventional graph-
ics pipeline based on textured mesh representations, followed by
shader and lighting processing. Personalized avatar heads are ei-
ther created from scratch by skilled artists and/or assisted using
sophisticated authoring tools for digital humans (e.g., Metahuman
Creator [Epic Games 2024b]). 3D scanning techniques based on
multi-view or photometric stereo are often used to capture accurate
geometry and skin appearance properties and facilitate the creation
of high-fidelity digital humans, but they require a complex capture
setup. More deployable solutions such as using handheld monoc-
ular cameras or depth sensors exist, but achieving photorealism
is often associated with a tedious shader/lighting fine-tuning pro-
cess, and custom modeling approaches for face regions, hair, and
eyes are typically required and remain challenging for real-time
performance.
3D Neural Head Modeling from Multi-View Stereo. Deep learning-
based (neural) rendering techniques are becoming increasingly pop-
ular as they facilitate the generation of photorealistic avatars using
implicit representations learned directly from captured data (im-
ages, videos, or 3D scans). A comprehensive survey can be found
in [Tewari et al. 2020]. Such a holistic approach enables a unified
way of modeling and rendering every head component, including
hair, eyes, and glasses, including view-dependent appearances and
complex material properties. In particular, there is no need for devel-
oping specialized models or shaders, and photorealistic 3D avatars
can be achieved more easily and without the need for human la-
bor, which is appealing for lifelike VR telepresence experiences. For
high-end use cases and research settings, complex multi-view video
camera systems are used to build a comprehensive dynamic neural
head model of a person with maximum face coverage.
Meta’s Deep Appearance Models, or Codec Avatars [Lombardi
et al. 2018], use a 3D mesh representation combined with view-
dependent dynamic textures, represented by a variational autoen-
coder (VAE) network, for realistic rendering of a head avatar. Their
solution also integrates inward-facing HMD cameras for real-time
avatar animation in a VR setting. Later works enhance the facial
expressiveness of the avatars [Wei et al. 2019] or develop a light-
weight model for running on a mobile VR headset [Ma et al. 2021].
However, for all Codec Avatar methods, a dense multi-view stereo
system (40 cameras) is used for learning dynamic facial textures per
subject, and a coarse triangle mesh is needed for real-time speed.
Lombardi and colleagues [Lombardi et al. 2019] introduced a fully
volumetric approach called Neural Volumes, which uses multiple
views of a dynamic object as input to an encoder-decoder archi-
tecture. The latent code generates dense 3D voxels that represent
appearance and opacity, which are sampled using a differentiable
ray marching algorithm and used for end-to-end training. This ap-
proach is suitable for rendering complex volumetric structures like
hair and transparent objects but suffers from an extensive memory
footprint. Mixture of Volumetric Primitives [Lombardi et al. 2021]
addressed the cubic memory requirement problem using a sparse
3D data structure based on rigidly-moving volumetric primitives,
initialized with a coarse tracked mesh, to model deformable objects
and produced higher quality renderings. Garbin et al. [Garbin et al.
2022] instead used an efficient deformable tetrahedral graph for
real-time rendering of generic dynamic objects in a multi-view set-
ting. The authors presented drivable neural head avatars for VR
telepresence applications using the volumetric tetrahedral structure
as an extension to a tracked facial blendshape model [Li et al. 2017].
Similar to the mentioned mesh-driven neural rendering methods, a
complex multi-view stereo scanner is needed, followed by hours of
data processing to build an avatar head, limiting its deployability.
Neural Radiance Fields (NeRFs) [Mildenhall et al. 2021] enable
highly realistic renderings as they learn view-dependent appear-
ances. The original work was designed for static scenes captured
from large numbers of calibrated views or a monocular moving
video sequence with camera poses obtained from structure-from-
motion. NeRF techniques that can handle deformable scenes [Du
et al. 2021; Li et al. 2021; Park et al. 2021a,b; Pumarola et al. 2021;
Tretschk et al. 2021] have been introduced for monocular video
input, and are generally based on computing a mapping between
a canonical and deformed state using deep neural network. More
recently, Kirschstein and coworkers have presented a multi-view
NeRF reconstruction and rendering method for human heads called
Nersemble [Kirschstein et al. 2023]. Their system combines a de-
formation field and multi-resolution hash encoding approach to
facilitate sparse (16-view) multi-view video input and efficient high-
fidelity rendering with blendshape type controls.
3D Gaussian Splatting [Kerbl et al. 2023] has been recently in-
troduced as an alternative to NeRFs for high-quality radiance field
rendering from multiple calibrated views without a deep neural
network. The method achieves superior efficiency and fidelity us-
ing anisotropic 3D Gaussians as an unstructured representation of
radiance fields combined with fast GPU-based differentiable render-
ing. Qian et al. have recently developed a 3D Gaussian-based Head
Avatar system [Qian et al. 2024] using video sequences recorded
from 16 views and shown that these 3D Gaussians can be initialized
and controlled using a FLAME model [Li et al. 2017] and produce
superior facial expression quality and accuracy than NeRF-based so-
lutions. A similar approach was proposed by Xu et al. [Xu et al. 2024]
but uses two separate 3D Gaussian representations, one for neutral
face and one for facial expressions, followed by a super-resolution
network to produce 2K image output. Saito et al. [Saito et al. 2024]
recently demonstrated that relightable Gaussian avatars are possible
using learnable radiance transfer functions using the UV space of a
parametric mesh model. While multi-view capture approaches for
neural head avatar modeling produce the highest fidelity and most
accurate results, the complex hardware requirements make them
unsuitable for consumer avatar creation and everyday deployment.
3D Neural Head Modeling from Monocular Video. A more accessi-
ble approach for building a neural head avatar consists of recording
various facial expressions and poses from a video sequence obtained
by a single monocular camera. Deep Video Portraits [Kim et al.


4
•
Tran et al.
2018] uses a source video to control the facial performance and head
pose of a person in a target video. The method consists of extract-
ing dynamic 3DMM models for both source and target subject and
translating the retargeted performance using a rendering-to-video
translation network [Ronneberger et al. 2015], which is trained on
all the frames of the target video. Thies and colleagues [Thies et al.
2019] introduced a deferred neural rendering framework where
neural texture maps, which are attached to a face rig, are learned
jointly, in order to produce more detailed facial expressions.
Gafni and coworkers developed a NeRF-based face reenactment
framework [Gafni et al. 2021], called NerFACE, that can be trained
from 2 minutes of video recordings and reenacted by a driver video
in real-time. They use a 3DMM and camera parameters as input
to a dynamic radiance field network, which is optimized using the
monocular video sequence, to synthesize a novel expression and
view of a target person. Similarly, Guo et al. [Guo et al. 2021] have
shown that audio-driven NeRF-based facial reenactment is possible.
Grassal et al. [Grassal et al. 2022] model the head avatar using an
explicit mesh representation and neural textures. Similar to Ner-
FACE [Gafni et al. 2021], training time is very long, with 7 hours on
two NVIDIA A100 GPUs. Zheng et al. [Zheng et al. 2022] create an
implicit morphable head avatar (I AM Avatar), where learned blend-
shapes and skinning fields are used to morph canonical geometry
and texture fields during animation and rendering. Its non-rigid
ray marching process can take up to 2 GPU days. HAvatar [Zhao
et al. 2023] uses a separate canonical and posed appearance volume
in addition to a parametric conditioned NeRF representation, sig-
nificantly improving disentanglement capabilities for more stable
animation and rendering quality. Their method is very robust and
synthesizes high-fidelity avatars, but training time also takes days.
Lately, Bai et al. [Bai et al. 2023] introduced a high-fidelity volumet-
ric head avatar solution by incorporating a 3DMM-anchored neural
radiance field, which is decoded from local features using convolu-
tional neural networks. While superior fidelity was demonstrated,
both training and rendering are prolonged.
Gao et al. [Gao et al. 2022] presented a highly efficient video-based
3D head modeling method for NeRF rendering. They combine multi-
level voxel fields with expression coefficients in latent space to re-
duce the neural model optimization to only 10-20 minutes. Zielonka
et al. [Zielonka et al. 2023] suggest a fast reduced the required
time to less than 10 minutes while outperforming the rendering
quality of several state-of-the-art methods. They employed a surface-
embedded dynamic NeRF approach based on multi-resolution hash
encoding for instant neural graphics primitives [Müller et al. 2022]
(Instant-NGP), combined with a 3DMM-driven geometry regular-
ization for improved pose extrapolation.
In practice, covering all possible facial expressions during the
short capture span is difficult, especially for an untrained end-user.
To this end, Cao et al. [Cao et al. 2022] introduced an approach that
customizes a universal prior model trained from 255 subjects to a
specific person’s face. The recording session consists only of a face
scan using a handheld video camera, and additional expression scans
can be optionally provided to improve expressions’ faithfulness.
Zheng et al. [Zheng et al. 2023] recently introduced a hybrid
deformable point-based representation that can better represent
intricate structures, e.g., fluffy hair, and is almost a magnitude
faster to train (e.g., 6 hours instead of 54 hours). Furthermore, the
neural avatars are relightable. An even faster relightable neural
avatar framework (15 minutes of optimization) has been presented
in [Bharadwaj et al. 2023], which uses a mesh-based representa-
tion and a combination of traditional graphics rendering and neural
network that approximates some of their components.
Since many of these techniques rely on a 3DMM model to cap-
ture a driver’s expressions, NeRF-based cross-identity reenactment
can deteriorate when there is a misalignment between the tracking
results. Consequently, Xu et al. [Xu et al. 2023c] proposed to learn
latent expression codes as the driver signal to improve the expres-
siveness of neural avatar heads. The method is self-supervised using
a photometric reconstruction loss. To reproduce fine-scale details
in facial expressions, Chen et al. [Chen et al. 2023] use part-based
implicit shape models to decompose a global deformation field into
local ones. While high-resolution details around eyes and teeth can
be obtained, the method struggles with extreme expressions and
poses. While significantly easier to deploy in a consumer setting,
monocular video-based avatar modeling techniques still require a
few minutes of facial recording. To cover all the necessary ranges
of facial motion, visual guidance is often preferred, but may be hard
to follow without practice. For instance, Apple’s Persona avatars,
released with the Apple Vision Pro, take around a minute to guide
the user through various expressions and head rotation by asking
the user to point the front of the VR headset to their face.
2D One-Shot Neural Head Reenactment. One-shot head reenact-
ment techniques use only a single source image as input and a driver
video to animate the source portrait. Since only one facial expres-
sion is available from the source (not necessarily neutral), these
methods are typically based on deep generative models trained on
large in-the-wild face datasets so that unseen and plausible facial
expressions of the source can be generated. Moreover, as the source
portrait is generally an unconstrained image, its identity needs to
be disentangled effectively from arbitrary poses and expressions.
Due to the large availability of unconstrained large face im-
age/video datasets, a number of 2D-based one-shot neural head
reenactment techniques have been introduced [Burkov et al. 2020;
Doukas et al. 2021; Drobyshev et al. 2022; Gao et al. 2023; Hong et al.
2022b; Ji et al. 2022; Ren et al. 2021; Siarohin et al. 2019a,b, 2021;
Song et al. 2021c; Tao et al. 2022; Wang et al. 2021a, 2022b; Wiles
et al. 2018; Xiang et al. 2020; Yin et al. 2022; Zakharov et al. 2020,
2019; Zhang et al. 2023; Zhao and Zhang 2022] and to accommodate
personalized facial expressions, few shot methods have also been
developed [Rochow et al. 2024; Zhang et al. 2022].
Several facial modeling techniques have been introduced, such as
based on facial keypoint or 3DMMs, to separate identity, expression,
and poses from the source and driver input. Despite its robustness,
using linear face models to capture expressions, often limits the
range of motions and expressiveness, and leads to identity leakage
from the source subject during reenactment. Want et al. [Wang
et al. 2022a] proposed an implicit disentanglement approach for
controllable talking head synthesis by leaning separate encoders for
head pose, mouth and eye movements, and emotional expressions,
where lip motions are learned from audio-visual data. Drobyshev et
al. [Drobyshev et al. 2022] introduced MegaPortraits, a robust and


VOODOO XP: Expressive One-Shot Head Reenactment for VR Telepresence
•
5
high-resolution real-time technique based on a CNN architecture,
where signals from the driver are directly mapped as facial expres-
sion features for face disentanglement and face synthesis, without
using an explicit parametric model. The method was able to achieve
state-of-the-art cross-reenactment results and image resolution us-
ing a carefully designed training process. To further enhance the
facial expressiveness, a new model EMOPortraits [Drobyshev et al.
2024] uses a combination of latent facial expression space devel-
opment and novel self-supervision loss functions, which mitigates
identity information in latent expression vectors explicitly.
Despite their ability to generate impressive high-resolution fa-
cial cross reenactment results, 2D-based real-time one-shot cross-
reenactment methods cannot ensure identity or expression consis-
tency for novel views which is an important requirement for 3D
rendering applications such as immersive telepresence. Hence, they
are typically limited to 2D video manipulation use cases. While
recent advancements in diffusion models [Ho et al. 2020; Song et al.
2021a,b] are showing highly diverse image generation capabilities
and learning capacities, several conditional diffusion-based 2D face
reenactment methods have emerged [Bounareli et al. 2024; Oh et al.
2024; Tao et al. 2024; Xie et al. 2024]. Most noteworthy, is the X-
Portrait [Xie et al. 2024] framework, which learns a motion control
module directly from the driving video using a hierarchical motion
attention approach. While being a purely 2D method, the novel
view synthesis is highly view-consistent, but, like most diffusion-
based approaches, the performance is far from real-time and the
generation of realistic faces often appears cartoonish.
3D One-Shot Neural Head Reenactment. Lately, a number of 3D-
aware one-shot neural head reenactment techniques [An et al. 2023;
Chan et al. 2022, 2021; Deng et al. 2022; Ki et al. 2024; Li et al. 2023a;
Niemeyer and Geiger 2021; Or-El et al. 2022; Schwarz et al. 2020;
Skorokhodov et al. 2022; Tran et al. 2024; Xiang et al. 2023; Xu
et al. 2023a,b; Xue et al. 2022; Ye et al. 2024] have been introduced,
which aim at generating consistent renderings from novel camera
poses and extreme angles, as a motivation to improve facial dis-
entanglement and enable multi-view rendering capabilities for 3D
holographic displays [Li et al. 2023a; Stengel et al. 2023; Tran et al.
2024]. Some of the early methods such as ROME [Khakhulin et al.
2022] use an explicit mesh-based representation, e.g., FLAME [Li
et al. 2017], combined with neural textures, but to ensure real-time
performance, low polygonal meshes prevent these systems to pro-
duce high-resolution geometric and appearance details. Most of the
3D head reenactment methods use a radiance field-based represen-
tation due to its ability to learn and render complex appearances
and intricate structures, while ensuring 3D awareness, meaning
view-consistent geometries.
The two methods, HeadNeRF [Hong et al. 2022a] and MofaN-
eRF [huang et al. 2022], use an implicit NeRF-based representation
to control the head pose, but their compact latent vector represen-
tation does not always ensure the source subject’s identity to be
preserved, and intensive test-time optimization is often necessary.
Most of the latest 3D-aware real-time reenactment techniques [Ki
et al. 2024; Li et al. 2023b,a; Tran et al. 2024; Ye et al. 2024; Yu
et al. 2023] implement tri-plane based representations [Chan et al.
2022; Chen et al. 2022] to generate neural radiance field from ex-
tracted input signal features, since they are particularly efficient
computation-wise and also compatible with CNN architectures.
While parametric 3DMM models are typically used to extract
facial expressions from the driver video and separate its features
from the subject’s identity [Hong et al. 2022a; Khakhulin et al. 2022;
Ki et al. 2024; Li et al. 2023b,a; Ma et al. 2023; Ye et al. 2024; Yu et al.
2023], only a recently developed method called VOODOO 3D [Tran
et al. 2024] can disentangle facial performances fully volumetrically
and without an explicit mesh model. Similar to the work of [Li
et al. 2023a] (GOHA), visual transformer networks were used to
extract identity features from the source and expression features
from the driver, but VOODOO 3D, introduces a particularly effective
volumetric disentanglement technique by performing a 3D lifted
frontalization [Trevithick et al. 2023] of both source and driver sig-
nals into a canonical neural radiance field. As demonstrated by [Tran
et al. 2024], the approach can handle extremely challenging uncon-
strained source images and more plausible and natural expressions
can be achieved, when compared to mesh-based disentanglement
approaches such as [Li et al. 2023a].
In a new work, Portrait4D, Deng et al. [Deng et al. 2024b] have
shown that volumetric disentanglement is possible without 3D lifted
frontalization for the driver, but can be achieved by directly mapping
its expression features into transformer blocks of the source’s 3D
lifting module. The facial expressions are then neutralized by several
transformer blocks, then added back at the end. To facilitate disen-
tanglement in this 3D-aware reenactment model, the authors use
a pre-trained expression encoder [Wang et al. 2022a] trained with
audio-visual data (dialogues). Shortly after its release, an improved
version, Portrait4D-v2 [Deng et al. 2024a] was presented, which
adopts a similar training approach as Voodoo 3D [Tran et al. 2024],
where 3D lifting is first trained then the expression module, rather
than both together. Compared to the first version, the results are
significantly improved, producing less artifacts and handling more
challenging source images. Since the pre-trained expression en-
coder [Wang et al. 2022a] only disentangles control over lip motion,
eye movements, and emotional expressions, very limited asymmet-
ric facial movements are present nor intense expressions or tongues.
Our proposed work, VOODOO XP, also maps expression features
of the driver directly into transformer blocks of the 3D lifted source
frontalization, but does not use a pre-trained expression encoder,
nor a neutralization step. Instead we learn the expressions encoder
end-to-end use a multi-phase training approach, which combines a
coarse-to-fine training approach with explicit neutralization and 3D
lifted frontalization in its initial stage, and GAN-based fine tuning
using unconstrained large video datasets. While [Tran et al. 2024]
have demonstrated their reenactment solution on 3D holographic
displays, we presents here, the first immersive telepresence sys-
tem with VR headsets, that adopts a one-shot head reenactment
technique for modeling and driving 3D avatars.
3
EXPRESSIVE 3D-AWARE HEAD REENACTMENT
Given a source image 𝑥𝑠and a driver image 𝑥𝑑, we develop an ex-
pressive 3D-aware head reenactment model to synthesize a 3D head


6
•
Tran et al.
DINO
DeepLabv3
driver
Ehigh
...
...
Volumetric
Renderer
Expression Transfer
3D Lifting & Rendering (Frozen weights)
Transformer
block
Transformer
block
Transformer
block
Transformer
block
Camera
pose
prediction
SegFormer
source
tri-plane
Fig. 2. Architecture of our expressive 3D-aware head reenactment pipeline. First, a vision transformer module, DINO, is used to extract the expression vector
from the driver image. This vector is then used to directly modify intermediate low-level features within the 3D lifting module using several cross and
self-attention layers, altering the expression of the tri-plane representation of the source image. Finally, we can render the reenacted source tri-plane from an
arbitrary viewpoint using a volumetric renderer.
input
...
neutralized tri-plane
Volumetric
Renderer
Neutralization
3D Lifting & Rendering (Frozen weights)
Transformer
block
Transformer
block
Segformer
neutral
pose
Ehigh
Elow
neutralized image
Fig. 3. Architecture of the neutralizer. Our neutralizer is based on Lp3D but
has a few additional self-attention blocks inside of the 𝐸𝑙𝑜𝑤module. We
only optimize these additional transformer blocks during training.
that combines the appearance of 𝑥𝑠and the expression of 𝑥𝑑, allow-
ing free-view rendering. We adopt a tri-plane based NeRF [Chan
et al. 2022] as the underlying 3D representation for its fidelity, gen-
eralizability, and efficiency. Our model is trained using a three-stage
approach, where all the stages share the same architecture as il-
lustrated in Fig. 2. Specifically, on top of a pre-trained 3D lifting
network [Trevithick et al. 2023] (Section 3.1), we add a trainable
expression transfer module (Section 3.2) to alter the expression. This
module first uses a vision transformer initialized from DINO [Caron
et al. 2021] to extract an expression vector from the driver image 𝑥𝑑.
The extracted expression vector is then used to directly modify in-
termediate low-level features within the 3D lifting module through
several cross and self-attention layers, altering the expression of
the source image 𝑥𝑠. However, training such network is non-trivial
as shown by [Deng et al. 2024b,a], where they use a pre-trained
expression encoder [Wang et al. 2022a] to facilitate disentanglement.
However, their approach cannot produce expressive expressions
since it is trained mainly with audio-visual data.
To stabilize the self-supervision of our transformer-based expres-
sion transfer model, we divide the training into multiple stages
(Section 3.3). The first stage uses several techniques to prevent iden-
tity leakage, so that the identity information of the driver does not
leak into the reenacted image. These methods include driver 3D
lifted head frontalization, augmentation, and a novel neutralizing
loss to minimize the difference between the neutralized source and
the neutralized cross-reenacted image. In the second stage, we in-
troduce a fine-scale training strategy using the model from the first
stage to supervise a higher resolution model training with the help
of generated synthetic drivers. This approach allows us to disable
all constraints used in the previous step that might compromise
expression quality, thereby further enhancing the expressiveness
of the output. In the third stage, we adopt global fine-tuning, by
unfreezing the 3D lifting module and applying GAN loss to increase
the high-frequency details of the reenacted images. Additionally,
per-subject fine-tuning can be introduced as an optional step to
improve the likeness and the expressiveness of the target identity.
Note that unless specified explicitly, no fine-tuning is applied in any
of the results in this paper.
3.1
3D Lifting and Rendering
Following previous works [Bai et al. 2024; Tran et al. 2024], we
adopt the state-of-the-art Lp3D [Trevithick et al. 2023] as our 3D
lifting model, which converts a 2D input image into a 3D neu-
ral radiance field. Its architecture is given in the bottom part of
Fig. 2. Given an input portrait, Lp3D first extracts low-level fea-
tures using a hybrid transformer model and high-frequency details
using a convolution-based network. These two features are then
fused using several computationally efficient transformer blocks
[Xie et al. 2021] to produce the canonicalized tri-plane representa-
tion {𝑇𝑖∈R𝐻×𝑊×𝐶|0 ≤𝑖≤2} of the input image, which can be
then rendered at arbitrary viewpoints using volumetric rendering
[Mildenhall et al. 2021] with density and color. These output values


VOODOO XP: Expressive One-Shot Head Reenactment for VR Telepresence
•
7
can be calculated from the tri-plane as following:
𝑐𝑥𝑦𝑧, 𝜎𝑥𝑦𝑧= 𝐷(𝑇0(𝑥,𝑦),𝑇1(𝑦,𝑧),𝑇2(𝑧,𝑥)),
(1)
where 𝑇𝑖(𝑢, 𝑣) is a feature vector calculated by interpolating 𝑇𝑖at
position (𝑢, 𝑣), and 𝐷is an MLP-based decoder that converts tri-
plane features into color and density at each specified 3D location.
To improve the rendering efficiency, Lp3D renders at a low resolu-
tion (128 × 128) and then upsamples it to a higher resolution image
(512 × 512) using a 2D super-resolution network. We train this mod-
ule using a combination of synthetic multi-view images generated
by a 3D-aware face generative model EG3D [Chan et al. 2022] and
DiffPortrait3D [Gu et al. 2024], as well as a real-world multi-view
dataset, NeRSemble [Kirschstein et al. 2023], which covers a wide
range of dynamic expressions. The EG3D-based dataset is crucial
for the training process since it allows us to effectively invert its
internal 3D representation by minimizing the differences between
the predicted and ground-truth tri-planes, as was proposed in prior
work [Trevithick et al. 2023]. The NeRSemble dataset has a high di-
versity of expressions, yet is limited in terms of identities, containing
around 200 subjects. Thus, we further boost our training data using
a state-of-the-art novel-view synthesis method DiffPortrait3D [Gu
et al. 2024]. We use it to generate novel views for the collection of
in-the-wild images with diverse appearances and expressions.
3.2
Expression Transfer
As shown in previous works [Bai et al. 2024; Trevithick et al. 2023],
the first branch of Lp3D extracts global features, such as the geome-
try of the head, while the second branch extracts high-frequency
details. Therefore, given a pre-trained Lp3D model, we can modify
the expression of a given source image by directly modifying its in-
termediate features in the low-level branch. To this end, we propose
a new architecture for expression transfer as shown in the upper
part of Fig. 2. First, we use a powerful vision transformer encoder
𝐸𝑒𝑥𝑝[Dosovitskiy et al. 2021] initialized from a pre-trained self-
supervised model [Caron et al. 2021] to extract an expression vector
𝑒𝑑= 𝐸𝑒𝑥𝑝(𝑥𝑑) from the driver. Then for each transformer block
𝐵𝑙𝑜𝑤
𝑖
in the low-level branch of Lp3D, we use another transformer
block 𝐵𝑒𝑥𝑝
𝑖
to modify its output:
𝐹𝑖= 𝐵𝑙𝑜𝑤
𝑖
(𝐹𝑖−1) + 𝐵𝑒𝑥𝑝
𝑖
(𝐹𝑖−1,𝑒𝑑),
where 𝐹𝑖is the output of𝑖𝑡ℎtransformer block in Lp3D. 𝐵𝑒𝑥𝑝
𝑖
(𝐹𝑖−1,𝑒𝑑)
uses a self-attention layers applied on 𝐹𝑖−1 following by a cross-
attention layer with 𝑒𝑑. Different from previous works [Chu et al.
2024; Khakhulin et al. 2022; Li et al. 2023a; Ma et al. 2023], which rely
on predicted expression coefficients of morphable models [Blanz
and Vetter 1999; Li et al. 2017] or auxiliary signals such as facial
key points or audio, we directly use the RGB image of the driver to
estimate the expression. This approach enables the modeling of com-
plex expressions, such as asymmetric expressions, face squeezing, or
tongue movements. However, training such an expression module
is hard due to identity leakage from the source. Specifically, without
proper training strategy, the identity clues of the driver, such as
hair, head geometry, or skin color, can leak into the reenacted image.
To address this issue, we introduce an efficient three-stage training
strategy, as detailed in the next section.
3.3
Multi-stage Training
Stage 1: Coarse-Level Model. To train the expression transfer mod-
ule, we propose a three-stage approach. In the first stage, we follow
the standard training pipeline of other facial reenactment methods.
Given a large-scale facial video dataset, during training, we ran-
domly sample two frames 𝑥𝑠1 and 𝑥𝑑1 from the same video and use
the following loss to train the model:
L𝑟𝑒𝑐(𝑥𝑠1→𝑑1,𝑥𝑑1) = L1(𝑥𝑠1→𝑑1,𝑥𝑑1) + L𝑝𝑒𝑟(𝑥𝑠1→𝑑1,𝑥𝑑1)
+L𝐼𝐷(𝑥𝑠1→𝑑1,𝑥𝑠1),
where 𝑥𝑠1→𝑑1 is the reenacted image with the source image 𝑥𝑠1 and
the driver image 𝑥𝑑1, L1 the L1 distance between the reenacted
image and the the driver image, L𝑝𝑒𝑟the perceptual loss [Zhang
et al. 2018] between them, and L𝐼𝐷measures the negative cosine
similarity between the face recognition embeddings [Deng et al.
2019a] of the facial images. Since the model is trained exclusively
on self-reenactment data, it can transfer not only the expression but
also some identity clues from the driver to the reenacted image. This
phenomenon is known as identity leakage. To avoid this, we adopt
several techniques from previous works, including frontalizing the
driver using a 3D lifting module [Tran et al. 2024] and applying
strong augmentations to the frontalized driver image [Drobyshev
et al. 2022; Tran et al. 2024], such as random color patching and ran-
dom masking. However, these techniques alone cannot completely
solve the identity leakage problem. To fully address this issue, we
propose a novel neutralizing loss. Specifically, let N (𝑥) be a func-
tion that maps the input face image 𝑥with arbitrary expression and
pose into its neutralized tri-plane representation. We then add the
following neutralizing loss to ensure the identity matching between
the source image and the cross-driver reenacted image:
L𝑛𝑒𝑢(𝑥𝑠1,𝑥𝑑2) = ∥N (𝑥𝑠1→𝑑2) −N (𝑥𝑠1)∥
where 𝑠1 and 𝑑2 are two identities from different videos. Finding
N is a highly challenging task due to the lack of supervised data
for training. Inspired by Noise2Noise [Lehtinen et al. 2018], which
demonstrated that denoising networks can be trained on pairs of
noisy images to predict the underlying clean signal by averaging
out the noise without the need of seeing the ground truth clean
image, we consider the following optimization task:
N∗= arg min
N
E𝑥𝑠1,𝑥𝑑1 ∥N (𝑥𝑠1) −𝑇𝑑1 ∥,
(2)
where 𝑥𝑠1 and 𝑥𝑑1 are statistically independent given that they share
the same identity, and 𝑇𝑑1 is the tri-plane representation of 𝑥𝑑1,
which can be extracted by the pre-trained 3D lifting module. Suppose
we have enough data, then the optimal function N∗will converge to
the average value of all 𝑇𝑑1 given the identity of 𝑥𝑠1, representing a
tri-plane of the neutralized face. Therefore, even without supervised
neutralizing data, we can use the objective function in Eq. (2) to
train the neutralizer using a large-scale video dataset. We implement
the neutralizer using the network structure described in Fig. 3. Our
final loss for the first stage can be formulated as:
Lstage 1(𝑥𝑠1,𝑥𝑑1,𝑥𝑑2) = L𝑟𝑒𝑐(𝑥𝑠1→𝑑1,𝑥𝑑1) + 𝜆𝑛𝑒𝑢L𝑛𝑒𝑢(𝑥𝑠1,𝑥𝑑2),
where 𝜆𝑛𝑒𝑢is the weight for the neutralizing loss. In our experiment,
we set 𝜆𝑛𝑒𝑢= 0.01.


8
•
Tran et al.
Stage 2: Fine-Level Model. While the model trained in the first
stage can produce reasonable expressions without identity leak-
age, the techniques used in that stage, such as driver frontalization,
augmentations, and neutralizing loss, can potentially clamp the
expressiveness. In addition, for better training efficiency, the res-
olution used in the first stage is only 128 × 128. Previous works
[Deng et al. 2024b,a; Li et al. 2023a; Tran et al. 2024] uses a 4× super-
resolution network to upsample the output to 512 × 512. However,
this approach often leads to inconsistencies, especially with extreme
poses, as shown in Fig. 7. Therefore, we introduce a second stage to
improve both the expressiveness and resolution of the first stage.
We first increase the rendering resolution of the 3D lifting module
from 128 to 256. We initialize the new 3D lifting module with the
weights from the first step, then fine-tune it at the higher rendering
resolution using the same set of losses. During training, instead
of calculating losses on the 256 × 256 images, we randomly ren-
der patches of sizes 172 × 172 in order to avoid the GPU memory
limitations and facilitating the use of larger batch sizes.
For the expression transfer module, we use the same architecture
of the first stage and initialize the network with the weights of
the trained model. To further improve expressiveness, we remove
driver frontalization, data augmentations, and the neutralizing loss.
To overcome the identity leakage problem, resulting from remov-
ing these techniques, and instead of only using paired source and
driver as self-reenactment data in the first stage, we use the first-
stage network to synthesize a cross-reenactment dataset. For each
synthetic data point, the source 𝑥𝑠1 and the ground-truth 𝑥𝑑1 are
sampled from the same video. Additionally, instead of only using
𝑥𝑑1 as the driver as in self-reenactment training, we generate a syn-
thetic driver 𝑥1
𝑠2→𝑑1 using the reenactment network, trained in the
first stage. This network uses 𝑥𝑑1 to drive a different identity image
𝑥𝑠2 sampled from another video. This data synthesizing approach
uses real images as both the source and ground truth, while only
using the output of the first stage as the driver. Consequently, the
quality of the second stage is no longer constrained by the first stage.
Finally, we adopt an eye-region loss Leye on self-reenactment data,
where only the eye regions are rendered using the frontal view of
the reenacted image 𝑥𝑠1→𝑑1 and ground-truth image 𝑥𝑑1, and we
calculate the 𝐿1 loss between them. As can be seen in Fig. 13, this
loss significantly improves the eye gaze accuracy of the output. The
loss for the second stage can be summarized as follows:
Lstage 2(𝑥𝑠1,𝑥𝑠2,𝑥𝑑1) = Lrec(𝑥𝑠1→𝑥1
𝑠2→𝑑1,𝑥𝑑1) + Lrec(𝑥𝑠1→𝑑1,𝑥𝑑1)
+Leye(𝑥𝑠1→𝑑1,𝑥𝑑1).
Stage 3: Global fine-tuning. The model from stage 2 can produce
highly expressive faces at high-resolution. However, we notice that
in practice, it does not preserve the identity of the source well. Note
that this issue is not due to identity leakage, as the identities of
the reenacted images remain consistent across different drivers. We
conjecture that this issue arises from the following reasons: (1) We
only uses 𝐿1 and LPIPS losses, which cause the model to ignore high-
frequency details; (2) Most of the data used in the previous stages
are expressive, but limited in the number of identities [Kirschstein
et al. 2023]; and (3) In both stages, the 3D lifting module is frozen,
which limits the capacity of the expression transfer module. Based
on these hypotheses, we introduce a final stage where we fine-tune
the entire network with an additional GAN loss. Specifically, we
unfreeze the weights of the lifting module and then train the model
with the following loss:
Lstage 3(𝑥𝑠1,𝑥𝑠2,𝑥𝑑1) = Lrec(𝑥𝑠1→𝑠𝑔(𝑥𝑠2→𝑑1 ),𝑥𝑑1)
+Lrec(𝑥𝑠1→𝑥𝑑1,𝑥𝑑1) + 𝜆𝐺𝐴𝑁LGAN(𝑥𝑠1→𝑠𝑔(𝑥𝑠2→𝑑1 ),𝑥𝑑1)
where 𝑠𝑔(·) is the stop-gradient operator and LGAN is a standard
projected GAN loss [Sauer et al. 2021] with corresponding weight
𝜆𝐺𝐴𝑁= 0.05 in our experiment. Here, we use a similar idea as in
stage 2, where we leverage the previous model to synthesize the
driver and therefore avoid identity leaking. However, different from
the second stage, we perform this on-the-fly, using a stop-gradient
operator. We observe that this stage greatly improves the identity
preservation and high-frequency expression details of the reenacted
images.
Finally, we use the trained network to synthesize a set of pairs
𝑥𝑠∈R512×512×3 and 𝑥𝑠→𝑠∈R256×256×3 and use them to train
a consistent 2× super-resolution network [Wang et al. 2021b]. In
Fig. 7, our results on extreme poses and novel view synthesis are
much more consistent than other methods.
Optional step: Few-shot fine-tuning. While our proposed work is
a one-shot reenactment technique, it inherently supports few-shot
input as a fine-tuning process. In particular when a few images or
video of the source is available, we simply use these additional source
images to fine-tune our model, using he same training strategy as in
stage 3. Thanks to the loss used in stage 3, the fine-tuned model still
works with an arbitrary driver. This optional stage can significantly
improve the expressiveness and likeness of the reenacted result,
even with a few additional images (e.g., 10 or 20), as demonstrated
in the results section. In practice, this optional step takes no longer
than additional tens of seconds of computation for each source
subject.
3.4
Implementation Details
We train the models of each stage using a mix of CelebVHQ [Zhu
et al. 2022], which is a large-scale video dataset with more than
33000 number of identties, and Nersemble [Kirschstein et al. 2023],
which contains a large variety of expressions, but the number of
identities is limited (. We train the 128 × 128 3D lifting module for
five days on 7 NVIDIA RTX6000ADA with a batch size 14 and a
learning rate of 1𝑒−4. For the 256 × 256 3D lifting module, it only
takes a day for the model to converge since we fine-tuned it from
the weights of the low-res version. The expression module takes
five days for all three stages to converge.
4
VR TELEPRESENCE SYSTEM
We propose the first immersive telepresence system for two-way
remote communication based on realistic 3D avatars built from one-
shot neural head reenactment. Each participant uses a Meta Quest
Pro VR headset, tethered to a high-performance workstation with
four NVIDIA RTX 6000 ADA GPUs (see Figure Fig. 4). In particular, 2
GPUs are used for each eye (left and right) for stereoscopic rendering
and we achieve 30 FPS at 512 × 512 pixel resolution (including super
resolution from 256 × 256). Our solution allows users to instantly


VOODOO XP: Expressive One-Shot Head Reenactment for VR Telepresence
•
9
Fig. 4. VR telepresence system setup. Our solution can be applied to an
end-to-end VR telepresence system for two-way communication.
User 1
Wearing VR HMD
HMD Built-in
Facial Tracking
Tracked Mesh Render
Source Image
Stereoscopic Neural Rendering
& Pose Tracking
VOODOO XP
Tracked Mesh Render
Source Image
Stereoscopic Neural Rendering
HMD Built-in
Pose Tracking
Head & Camera Pose Fusion
& Facial Tracking
VOODOO XP
User 2
Wearing VR HMD
Fig. 5. Overview of our two-way VR telepresence system. For each user, we
track pose and expressions using built-in tracking of the headset and use
them to drive our reenactment system. To create an avatar, we can either
use a user’s portrait (User 2) or an arbitrary photo (User 1).
build their 3D avatar instantely (60 ms), just by taking a photo
with a webcam or by loading a picture. Once created, the users can
immediately control their neural heads by simply wearing their VR
headset, which captures their facial expressions and eye-gaze, using
the built-in outside-in cameras and the 6DoF head pose using the
integrated inside-out/IMU tracker.
System overview. Our complete VR telepresence system is illus-
trated in Fig. 5. For VR-based facial performance capture, we simply
use Meta’s Movement SDK [Meta 2024a] and Headset Tracking
SDK [Meta 2024b], as input signals to a Unity game engine [Unity
2024] scene with a generic parametric blendshape model. The facial
expressions consist of 63 blendshapes (7 for tongue) and 2 gaze con-
trols (angles) for each eye. This generic face model is then animated
and rendered using a traditional computer graphics (CG) pipeline
to produce a live video stream, which serves as input to our neural
head reenactment framework.
For each person’s Unity scene, we render the generic face model
placed in a canonical coordinate frame without applying 6DoF head
pose transformations. Then, our VOODOO XP framework converts
a CG video of a frontalized generic avatar into a photorealistic
avatar, seen from two novel stereoscopic views. Two instances of
VOODOO XP are running in parallel on the workstation and all
frame processing is fully synchronized using another controller
thread. Note that user 1 sees the face of user 2, so the avatar creation,
animation, and rendering on user 1’s side, should be for the avatar of
user 2. Hence, our system transfers user 2’s avatar input photo first
onto the system of user 1, and vice versa, before communication
happens. While the rendering of user 2’s avatar occurs on user
1’s side, it uses the head pose of user 1 as the camera view pose
during reenactment. Consequently, the inverse head pose of user
2 is multiplied by the head pose of user 1 on user 1’s system. We
denote this step as head and camera pose fusion in Fig. 5. Finally, the
combined head poses are used as input for novel view generation,
combined with the frontalized driver video for both left and right
eye cameras, into our VOODOO XP head reenactment framework.
The stereoscopic neural renderings are then fed back into the same
local Unity scene instance and rendered into VR HMD accordingly
as synchronized stereoscopic video textures via Meta XR Simulator.
Our immersive communication is extremely low bandwidth and
low latency, as we only need to transmit 63 facial blendshape values,
based on Facial Action Coding System [Ekman and Friesen 1978]
(FACS), 4 signals for eye gaze angles, and 6DoF head pose parameters
between users, as all the neural rendering of the opposite user
happens on each person’s system locally.
Generic Driver Rig. In contrast to our base VOODOO XP system,
which can process driver input frames of arbitrary subjects in un-
constrained settings and head poses, we use a generic avatar head
model for our VR application, with expressions compatible with
Meta’s Movement SDK and use a frontalized view as it maximizes
the visibility of expressions independently of the user’s head pose.
We adopted the shape and mesh topology of the generic head model
from Pinscreen’s AvatarNeo SDK [Pinscreen 2024] and transferred
FACS-based [Ekman and Friesen 1978] facial expressions from the
Meta Movement SDk’s Aura character. Our model consists of 13K
vertices for the face, 4K vertices for the mouth interior (gum, teeth,
tongue), and 3K vertices for the eyes.
To build the facial expression blendshapes for our generic head
model, we first warp our generic head model to the Auro neutral face
mesh to establish one-to-one correspondences between meshes with
different mesh topologies using a non-rigid registration algorithm
based on [Li et al. 2009]. A deformation transfer technique [Sumner
and Popović 2004] is then used to transfer facial expressions from
the Aura face model back to our generic head model. We transfer all
273 facial blendshapes as well as 28 additional blendshapes of the
mouth interior model (gum, teeth, and tongue) from Aura’s model,
and combine all of them into 63 linear blendshapes for the headset
tracking. A skilled digital artist refined all facial blendshapes via 3D
sculpting and real-world FACS expression references corresponding
to Meta’s movement SDK guideline, to ensure expressive and natural
movements as not all facial expressions of Aura are ideal. This
process is only done once as we are using the same generic head
model for each driver.
5
EXPERIMENTS
5.1
Benchmark Dataset
Existing datasets commonly used for benchmarking [Karras et al.
2018; Zhang et al. 2021] lack pose diversity, since most faces in them
are frontal. In addition, they do not cover a wide range of facial
expressions. In this work, we propose a new evaluation dataset
for facial reenactment that covers a wide range of different poses,


10
•
Tran et al.
Pose coverage
Expression coverage
Fig. 6. Our evaluation dataset covers a wide range of poses, expressions,
genders, accessories, and ethnicities
expressions, and ethnicities. To this end, we capture video data
of 17 different subjects. For each subject, we record five different
scenarios: normal conversation, extreme pose rotation, mild pose
rotation, and extreme expression with random poses. We also take
into account many different accessories, e.g., hijab, sunglasses, or
eyeglasses. This resulted in 102 videos totaling more than 137,000
frames. We filter out similar frames by performing a clustering of
200 centers based on each frame’s facial landmarks and then pick 200
frames that have the closest landmarks to each center. This reduced
the number of frames to 20,400 which we used for the evaluation.
The examples from our dataset can be seen in Fig. 6.
For the self-reenactment task, we use the first frame of each video
as the source and the rest as the driver. For the cross-reenactment
task, we also use the first frame of the videos as the source but the
drivers are frames of another video with different identities.
5.2
Baseline Comparison
We compare our method against the following one-shot neural head
avatar systems: EMOPortraits [Drobyshev et al. 2024], GOHA [Li
et al. 2023a], Portrait4D [Deng et al. 2024b], Portrait4D-v2 [Deng
et al. 2024a], and VOODOO 3D [Tran et al. 2024].
EMOPortraits [Drobyshev et al. 2024] is a 2D avatar synthesis
method that models extreme expressions via latent vectors of low
dimensionality. The latter are learned in a self-supervised fashion
from the in-the-wild video data.
GOHA [Li et al. 2023a] represents the subject’s expression using
a 3DMM [Blanz and Vetter 1999] parametric model. Their method
employs a pre-trained expression extractor [Deng et al. 2019b] that
learns to predict facial shape and texture blendshapes from in-the-
wild data using photometric supervision. These expressions are
then imposed onto a tri-plane representation of the face [Chan et al.
2022] by predicting its residual.
Portrait4D [Deng et al. 2024b] and Portrait4D-v2 (denoted as
P4D-v2) both leverage a pre-trained 3D human face generation
model called GenHead that combines a modified EG3D [Chan et al.
2022] pipeline with explicit conditioning on the FLAME [Li et al.
2017] head pose and expression parameters. The authors leverage
GenHead to generate a synthetic dataset used to train a 3D avatar
system conditioned on a source image identity and a driver image
expression. To encode the expression from the driver image while
preserving the disentanglement between the identity and expression,
they rely on a pre-trained expression extractor [Wang et al. 2022a]
which is supervised using audio and keypoint-based data and thus
does not contain identity-specific information.
VOODOO 3D [Tran et al. 2024] also leverages a pre-trained
generative model for human faces. In this work, similarly to ours,
the authors use the EG3D [Chan et al. 2022] generator to train a 3D
lifting network, following the approach of Live 3D Portraits [Ye et al.
2024]. VOODOO 3D then uses an expression estimation procedure
that modifies the 3D-lifted representation and is learned directly
from in-the-wild data.
5.3
Qualitative Evaluation of Cross-Reenactment
We conduct the evaluation using both in-the-wild and studio data.
For the in-the-wild data, we use a set of celebrities with diverse
ethnicities, poses, and expressions.
The qualitative comparison results are presented in Figs. 7 and 8,
more examples for our method with the novel-view synthesis eval-
uation in Fig. 9, and few-shot fine-tuning results in Fig. 10. For
EMOPortraits, we showcase performance only in extreme cases,
as this method is 2D and is not designed for the 3D novel-view
synthesis task.
First, we notice that most of the baseline methods are capable of
reenacting simple expressions, such as open mouth, see the fourth
row of Fig. 7. However, both versions of Portrait4D noticeably strug-
gle to generate images without artifacts, which are especially visible
in the region of teeth, and GOHA changes the facial shape. When
even minor asymmetries are introduced in the mouth or eyebrow
shapes, such as in the first three rows, it already poses a substantial
challenge for the base methods. For example, we can see that our
method can faithfully convey a correct change of the mouth shape,
see the example in the first row, while GOHA and VOODOO 3D
simply reenact a smiling face. None of the base methods is also ca-
pable of reenacting asymmetrically raised eyebrows, see row three.
Going to the more extreme mouth shape changes in the last four
rows, we can see most of the base methods completely fail to reflect
the expression of the driver, while our method manages to reenact
the faces with high accuracy, especially in the mouth region. Lastly,
even in the most challenging cases showcased in Fig. 8, i.e., for large
head rotations and tongue movement, our method still produces
convincing results. Notice that while VOODOO 3D is also capable
of realistically synthesizing large head pose movements, it intro-
duces substantial identity change in the process. It is also worth
noting that our method can synthesize tongues as well as correct
eyebrow movements behind glass frames, as well as reconstruct
view-consistent eyeglasses.
