Title: Headevolver: Text to head avatars via expressive and attribute-preserving mesh deformation

HeadEvolver: Text to Head Avatars via Expressive
and Attribute-Preserving Mesh Deformation
Duotun Wang1∗, Hengyu Meng1∗, Zeyu Cai1*, Zhijing Shao1, Qianxi Liu1, Lin Wang1,3
Mingming Fan1,3, Xiaohang Zhan2, Zeyu Wang1,3
1The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou) 2Tencent AI Lab
3The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
Figure 1. Generated results and supported user editing in our framework. (a) Our framework can deform a template mesh to stylized
head avatars under text guidance. (b) Users can use a text prompt to edit local geometry. (c) Shape attributes such as 3DMM parameters,
blendshapes, and UV coordinates are preserved for downstream animation and editing.
Abstract
Current text-to-avatar methods often rely on implicit
representations (e.g., NeRF, SDF, and DMTet), leading to
3D content that artists cannot easily edit and animate in
graphics software. This paper introduces a novel frame-
work for generating stylized head avatars from text guid-
ance, which leverages locally learnable mesh deformation
and 2D diffusion priors to achieve high-quality digital as-
sets for attribute-preserving manipulation. Given a tem-
plate mesh, our method represents mesh deformation with
per-face Jacobians and adaptively modulates local defor-
mation using a learnable vector field. This vector field en-
*indicates equal contributions
ables anisotropic scaling while preserving the rotation of
vertices, which can better express identity and geometric
details. We employ landmark- and contour-based regular-
ization terms to balance the expressiveness and plausibility
of generated avatars from multiple views without relying on
any specific shape prior. Our framework can generate re-
alistic shapes and textures that can be further edited via
text, while supporting seamless editing using the preserved
attributes from the template mesh, such as 3DMM param-
eters, blendshapes, and UV coordinates. Extensive experi-
ments demonstrate that our framework can generate diverse
and expressive head avatars with high-quality meshes that
artists can easily manipulate in graphics software, facilitat-
ing downstream applications such as efficient asset creation
arXiv:2403.09326v4  [cs.GR]  30 Apr 2025


and animation with preserved attributes. Our project page
is at: https://www.duotun-wang.co.uk/HeadEvolver/
1. Introduction
Head avatar modeling is an important and challenging
task in visual computing due to its increasing need in ap-
plications such as games [16], movies [19], virtual real-
ity [50], and online education [7]. Traditionally, creating
a high-fidelity head avatar demands skilled technical artists
to invest considerable time and effort into modeling and an-
imation.
While recent advances in AI-generated content
(AIGC), particularly in text-to-3D, offer new avenues for
accessible and cost-effective avatar creation, some practi-
cal gaps persist. For example, several methods [48, 62, 58]
used generative models [15, 13, 46] to support text-guided
human head generation. Nevertheless, these methods suffer
from acquiring high-quality and diverse datasets for train-
ing.
Another set of methods [14, 23, 60, 32] leveraged
frozen large-scale vision language models (VLMs) to create
3D head avatars. These methods use 2D priors to provide
multi-view guidance without requiring 3D training data and
thus produce more diverse results.
However, there is a significant gap between current text-
to-avatar methods and 3D asset creation, as most meth-
ods do not effectively integrate high fidelity, user cus-
tomization, and animation support. This is mainly caused
by employing implicit shape representations that cannot
preserve 3D attributes essential for downstream manipu-
lation, e.g., mesh topology, rig, and UV mapping.
For
instance, HeadArtist [32] and HeadSculpt [14] leverage
DMTet [44] to create head avatars with 3D Morphable Mod-
els (3DMMs) [4, 28] as shape priors.
While these ap-
proaches create a realistic appearance, DMTet discards sta-
tistical parameters from 3DMMs, leading to noisy meshes.
Head avatar generation using an explicit mesh represen-
tation would benefit downstream applications because of
its editability and compatibility with graphics pipelines, al-
though there is less existing research in this direction. A
notable method is TADA [30], which incorporates the op-
timizations of vertex displacement and SMPL-X parame-
ters [36]. This strategy preserves the semantics of 3DMMs
and enables animatable 3D head avatar generation. How-
ever, direct vertex displacement tends to deform meshes
with self-intersected faces and noisy normals, leading to
limited mesh quality and artifacts in the animation. TextDe-
former [9] can change an input mesh smoothly and stably
by deforming through Jacobians, but it cannot generate a
textured appearance and lacks local geometry details.
This paper aims to create high-quality avatars that sup-
port animation and editing without reconstructing blend-
shapes or rigs. We propose a novel text-to-avatar frame-
work that produces stylized head avatars through expressive
and attribute-preserving mesh deformation. Given a single
template mesh such as FLAME [28], ICT-Face [27], or any
manifold mesh preferably with facial semantics, our frame-
work deforms it into a desired target shape while preserving
feature correspondences such as skinny weights and UV co-
ordinates for animation and editing, as shown in Figure 1(c).
The key observation is that optimizing Jacobians enables
smooth global shape changes [1] but lacks expressive local
deformations when processing gradients from text and im-
age losses, compared to direct vertex displacements. This
local control is essential for generating diverse styles, such
as the elongated nose in Figure 1(b). Furthermore, it is often
laborious to tune deformation hyper-parameters to achieve
both text-guided expressiveness and shape smoothness [35].
Therefore, we propose per-triangle learnable weighting fac-
tors coupled with Jacobians to enhance fine-grained defor-
mations, which we refer to as vector fields.
The notion
of vector fields was initially introduced through a Poisson-
based solver [57] to guide mesh deformations and recon-
structions. In this study, we expand upon this by incorpo-
rating differentiable settings for 3D generation tasks.
In order to build a complete 3D head avatar genera-
tion framework via gradient-based optimization, we employ
a pre-trained diffusion model [38] with 3D awareness by
leveraging a frozen landmark-guided ControlNet [63, 34].
Given a camera pose, we render shaded and normal im-
ages and obtain the opacity mask and the predefined vertex-
indexed landmarks projected from the 3D head. As Figure 2
illustrates, the stable diffusion model accepts text prompts,
rendered images, and landmarks as additional conditions
from ControlNet to compute the Score Distillation Sam-
pling (SDS) loss. In addition, to mitigate unexpected ge-
ometry distortions and self-intersecting triangles, we intro-
duce landmark- and contour-based regularization terms. In
summary, our contributions are as follows.
• We introduce a per-triangle vector field to enhance the
expressiveness of mesh deformation over local regions
while preserving 3D attributes.
• We
propose
a
diffusion-based
framework
with
landmark- and contour-based regularization terms for
high-quality text-to-avatar mesh generation.
• Extensive experiments demonstrate that our method
can generate stylized 3D head avatars supporting as-
set creation with interactive editing and animation.
2. Related Work
Recently, there has been rapid research progress in digi-
tal human modeling and text-to-3D content generation. Our
work centers on text-guided synthesis of head avatars em-
ploying an explicit mesh representation, aiming to fulfill
three criteria outlined in Table 1. In addition, our framework


Table 1. Compared to other text-to-avatar approaches, our method
preserves predefined 3D attributes (e.g., vertex-indexed land-
marks, rig, blendshapes). It accommodates any template mesh
independent of parametric models and operates solely on gradient-
based optimizations without training data or fine-tuning.
Attribute
Non-reliance on
No Training Data
Preservation
Parametric Models
nor Fine-tuning
HeadScuplt [14]
✗
✓
✗
Fantasia3D [6]
✗
✓
✓
TADA [30]
✓
✗
✓
DreamFace [62]
✓
✗
✗
Ours
✓
✓
✓
generates mesh models that are compatible with graphic
pipelines for direct manipulation in 3D software.
2.1. Text-to-3D Avatar Generation
The success of text-driven generative models has sparked
a wide range of research in 3D content synthesis. These
methods are based on different geometry representations
such as NeRF [31, 49], tri-plane [45], mesh[6], and Gaus-
sian Splatting [47, 29]. In text-to-avatar generation, many
efforts have been made to develop 3D generative mod-
els [48, 62, 56, 59] typically based on GANs [12] or dif-
fusion models [15]. These methods often demand extensive
3D head data for training, incurring high costs. Moreover,
they face challenges due to limited 3D datasets for creating
diverse head avatars matching text prompts.
To bypass the extensive training process of 3D generative
models and insufficient 3D data, recent research [17, 61]
has made remarkable advances by harnessing the capa-
bilities of vision-language models (e.g., CLIP [41] and
SDS [38]) to generate static human avatars from text
prompts. DreamWaltz [21] aims to enhance the realism of
avatar animations with pose-guided ControlNet [63]. Sim-
ilarly, DreamHuman [26] employs a signed distance field
conditioned on pose and shape parameters to empower an-
imations with NeRF. However, extracting, editing, and ani-
mating an explicit mesh from these works are not straight-
forward [21] (e.g., use marching cube or tetrahedra algo-
rithms) since NeRF and DMTet [44], for instance, represent
shapes through network weights. Meanwhile, the issue of
poor mesh quality is often concealed by texture, as the ge-
ometry and texture optimizations are fully mixed. Recent
works [6, 14, 32] disentangle the learning of geometry and
texture to improve the avatar mesh quality. Our work also
leverages differentiable rendering, stable diffusion, and a
hybrid optimization process for mesh and texture synthesis,
specifically emphasizing the deformation of an explicit ge-
ometry template through semantic guidance instead of gen-
eration from scratch or using implicit representations.
2.2. Learning-Based Mesh Optimization
Parametric mesh templates have been a prominent re-
search focus for human avatar reconstruction and genera-
tion tasks, as these models are well-suited in a deep learning
context. AvatarClip [18] and CLIP-Face [2] employ para-
metric models such as SMPL-X [36] and FLAME [28] as
geometry prior to produce text-aligned avatars. DreamA-
vatar [5] extracts the shape parameters of SMPL as a 3D
prior to learn a NeRF-based color field. HeadSculpt [14]
and HeadArtist [32] utilize the FLAME template as canon-
ical shape input and extract its facial landmark to guide
avatar generations through DMTet. However, meshes ex-
tracted from implicit representations tend to lose the seman-
tics of 3DMMs [4], posing challenges for downstream ap-
plications such as interactive editing and animation.
From the perspective of geometry editing through ex-
plicit deformation, recent works propose data-driven ap-
proaches [3, 1] to predict realistic deformation and some
methods focus on learning deformation over one template
mesh through tuning per-vertex coordinates [54, 64, 8].
TADA [30] directly optimizes vertex displacements along
with the SMPL-X’s pose and shape parameters and achieves
animatable avatars. However, this characteristic is highly
dependent on the quality of 3DMMs. Straightly optimiza-
tion of non-convex mesh structures often converges to un-
desirable local minima, resulting in noticeable artifacts on
surface details. TextDeformer [9] initially integrates CLIP
into a learning-based deformation pipeline to address the
scarcity of 3D datasets that pair shapes with captions. Our
approach extends this by employing vector fields to opti-
mize local semantic deformations on any template mesh, in-
dependent of its shape, expression, or blendshapes [4]. Our
goal is to enhance identity expressiveness guided by text in-
put. The resulting head avatars can be animated using the
original rigging from the source mesh and seamlessly inte-
grated into existing 3D design and animation workflows.
3. Methodology
In this section, we describe the details of our genera-
tion pipeline, as shown in Figure 2. Given a source tem-
plate mesh, we jointly optimize the mesh deformation and
an albedo map guided by a text prompt. Our approach is not
limited to a specific parametric model (e.g., FLAME), and
Figures 9 and 10 show the generalization of our approach.
3.1. Mesh Deformation through Vector Fields
Let M = (V, F) denote a source template mesh which
consists of a set of vertices V ∈Rn×3 and faces F ∈Zm×3.
For the optimization strategy of mesh deformation, directly
applying displacement to each vertex can result in severe
self-interactions of triangle faces since it is susceptible to
localized noisy gradients from pixel-level losses. Instead,
we parameterize deformation mapping Φ : Rn×3 →Rn×3
by employing Jacobian fields [1] J = {Jf|f ∈F} that
represents the scaling and rotation of each mesh face. A


“Terracotta Army”
Vector Field
Landmark
ControlNet
fJ
Jacobian Field
Vector Field Hf
Landmarks
Figure 2. Framework overview. We deform a template mesh by optimizing per-triangle vector fields guided by a text prompt. Rendered
normal and RGB images coupled with MediaPipe landmarks are fed into a diffusion model to compute respective losses. Our regularization
of Jacobians controls the fidelity and semantics of facial features that conform to text guidance.
Figure 3. Visualization of vector field Hf through Wf. Orange
colors indicate strong deformations and Wf = I refers to no de-
formation enhancement.
dual representation of M can be defined as a stack of per-
face Jacobians Jf ∈R3×3 where
Jf = ∇fV,
(1)
and ∇f is the gradient operator of triangle f. Conversely,
we optimize each vertex’s position from per-face Jacobian.
After obtaining optimized Jacobians in each iteration, we
can compute the deformation mapping Φ over a set of ver-
tices conforming to the source mesh topology by solving a
Poisson problem, i.e.,
Φ∗= arg min
Φ
X
f∈F
|f|∥∇f(Φ) −Jf∥2
2,
(2)
where ∇f(Φ) is the Jacobian of Φ at a triangle face f and
|f| is the area of the face. Thus, the deformation map Φ
over the input template mesh is indirectly optimized through
Jacobians Jf in the least square sense. The solution can be
obtained by using a differentiable solver [1, 9]:
Φ∗= L−1∇T AJ,
(3)
where ∇is a stack of per-face gradient operators, A ∈
R3m×3m is the mass matrix of M, and L ∈R3n×3n is
the cotangent Laplacian of M. This learnable shape rep-
resentation based on Jacobians is robust to noisy gradi-
ents. It can achieve better geometry quality (e.g., fewer
self-intersections and noisy normals) than direct vertex dis-
placements, which is further justified in Section 4.
However, during our experiment, we observed that the
Poisson solver applied in Equation 2 can impose strong
geometry constraints for Jacobians to reach the global-
coherence mesh deformation [9], which may lose fine-grain
details for local shape features and compromise the iden-
tity of the generated head mesh (Figure 6). A straightfor-
ward approach is to increase the learning rate for Jacobians
to enhance their sensitivities to propagated gradients. This
amplifies the rotation and scaling of each face, resulting in
stronger deformations. However, intensified rotations raise
the likelihood of inverted triangles [43], leading to an un-
stable optimization process and a poor-quality mesh. To ad-
dress the above concerns, we introduce a learnable per-face
vector field H = {Hf|f ∈F} to enhance the deformation
expressiveness of Jacobian field J, i.e.,
Wf = diag(wx, wy, wz),
Hf = WfJf.
(4)
By substituting H into Equation 3, the deformation map-
ping could be computed by
Φ∗= L−1∇T AH.
(5)
The effect of W
= {Wf|f
∈F} is to control the
anisotropic scaling (e.g., stretching and shrinking in dif-
ferent directions) on each face. As shown in Figure 3, it


can adaptively learn the anisotropic scaling on correspond-
ing triangular faces that can represent the character’s fea-
tures. Consequently, the per-face vector field H prioritizes
the Poisson solver for more effective head avatar identity
expression than using only Jacobians (Section 4.4).
3.2. Text-Guided 3D Synthesis
We aim to build a text-guided head avatar generation
framework based on differentiable mesh deformation and
texture generation. Moti.vated by recent success in large-
scale VLMs and text-to-3D literature discussed in Sec-
tion 2.1, we utilize a powerful 2D diffusion prior (i.e.,
SDS [38]) to direct deformations by scoring the rendering
realism of the generated shape in our framework.
Specifically, by following the procedure described in
Section 3.1, we denote V∗as the set of deformed vertices
from J.
Then, by using a differentiable render R, we
render M∗= (V∗, F) from a viewpoint delineated by
camera extrinsic parameter C, which produces an image
I = R(M∗, C). The SDS loss is leveraged to alter the
geometry and color respectively, that is:
∇JLSDS(ϵ, I) = Et,ϵ

w(t)(ϵθ(zt; y, C, t) −ϵ) ∂I
∂J

,
(6)
where ϵ ∼N(0, I), ϵθ is the pre-trained diffusion priors
with the network parameter θ, w(t) is a weight coefficient
related to timestep t ∼U(0, 1), y is the text input condition,
zt denotes a latent embedding of I perturbed with noises at
time step t, and C is the MediaPipe [34] facial landmark
map. Rendered image I are obtained and encoded from the
normal In and shaded Is, as seen in Figure 2.
To ensure deformation mapping from propagated gradi-
ents and the Poisson solver can conform to the facial topol-
ogy and reasonable semantics of the source mesh, we fur-
ther develop two regularization terms, aiming to preserve
3D attributes of generated head avatars (Figure 8).
Landmark regularization. The landmark regulariza-
tion measures the difference between predefined N 3D face
landmarks ki ∈R3 on the canonical template mesh M and
the corresponding ones on the deformed mesh k′
i ∈R3 af-
ter projection. The landmark regularization loss is defined
as Llmk = 1
N
PN
i=1 ||ki −k′
i||2
2.
Evolving contour-based regularization.
Inspired by
AvatarCraft [24], we incorporate an opacity map O to pre-
serve a plausible head shape while minimizing excessive
or undesired vertex displacement. To balance diverse ge-
ometry shapes and constraints from severe deformations,
the source template mesh is periodically updated from de-
formed mesh every 300 steps [51]. The pixel-level loss is
parameterized as Lop =
1
hw
P
h,w ||O −O′||2
2, where h and
w represent the height and width of the opacity mask of the
template mesh O and the optimized head avatar O′. The
total loss is defined as follows:
L = λ1∇ΦLSDS + λ2Llmk + λ3Lop,
(7)
where λ1 = 1, λ2 = 200, and λ3 = 250 are the hyper-
parameters in our experiment settings.
4. Experiments
In this section, we conduct experiments to evaluate the
efficacy of our method both quantitatively and qualitatively
for text-to-avatar creation. We then present two ablation
studies that validate the significance of our key designs for
vector fields and regularization terms in Section 4.4.
4.1. Implementation Details
For geometry and texture generation, we render normal
and shaded images at a resolution of 1024×1024 pixels and
feed them into the Realistic Vision 5.1 (RV 5.1) [25]. Com-
pared with Stable Diffusion 2.1 [42], we find that RV 5.1
supports a more appealing avatar appearance. The multi-
face Janus and texture misalignment problems are further
alleviated by introducing ControlNetMediaPipeFace [63].
The generation process runs on a single NVIDIA RTX
4090 GPU with 20, 000 iterations per avatar, which takes
around 30 minutes. Negative prompts are leveraged to en-
hance the realism and details of the texture, e.g., “unrealis-
tic,” “blurry,” “low quality,” “saturated,” “low contrast,” etc.
Along with the proposed regularization terms, we enforce
symmetry along the y-axis in each iteration to ensure a rea-
sonable face appearance. Following established practices in
TADA and DreamFace, the eyeball mesh is removed and
can be manually reintegrated after the generation.
Figure 4. Qualitative appearance comparisons. Our method can
produce diverse textured avatars.


Figure 5. Qualitative geometry comparisons. Our method effectively preserves the topology and semantics of the input template mesh,
resulting in high-quality mesh models for smooth manipulations.
4.2. Qualitative Evaluation
Our evaluation compares two explicit mesh manipula-
tion methods (i.e., TADA [30] and TextDeformer [9]), and
two implicit methods (i.e., Fantasia3D [6] and Human-
Norm [20]) as baselines.
While our framework focuses
on high-quality mesh topologies, we also compare ren-
dering appearance with recent non-mesh-dependent meth-
ods [32, 14, 65] in supplemental material (Figure 18). We
utilized FLAME [28] as a unified input template mesh to
conduct the experiments. We present the visual compari-
son results in Figures 4 and 5. TADA and Fantasia3D show
detail-preserving geometry with 3D head priors but still un-
dergo geometric artifacts in dense areas like eye regions,
which are less noticeable in textured rendering. Human-
Norm underperforms in humanoid cases, e.g., “Terracotta
Army” and “Monkey.” Compared to TextDeformer, our ap-
proach exhibits similar mesh quality and amplifies facial
characteristics following text specifications.
In summary, our framework generates expressive head
meshes that inherit facial attributes. The texture generation
maintains decent geometry consistency, facilitating usage in
graphics applications (Figures 1(c) and 4).
4.3. Quantitative Evaluation
We quantitatively evaluated our framework for genera-
tion consistency with text input and generation quality.
Generation Consistency with Text. We first evaluated
the relevance of generated results to the corresponding text
descriptions by calculating the CLIP score [41]. We ren-
dered 20 distinct views and computed the average scores
respectively, as shown in Table 2. Our approach achieves
the highest scores compared to the baseline methods.
Table 2. Quantitative comparison of state-of-the-art methods. The
geometry CLIP score is measured on the shaded images rendered
with uniform albedo colors [40], the appearance CLIP score is
evaluated on the images rendered with textures, and the self-
intersection is quantified as the ratio of self-intersected mesh faces
to the total number of mesh faces.
Geometry
Appearance
Mesh
CLIP Score ↑
CLIP Score ↑
Self-Intersection ↓
Fantasia3D
0.1815
0.2718
-
HumanNorm
0.2443
0.3031
-
TextDeformer
0.2462
-
2.19%
TADA
0.2475
0.2931
14.22%
Ours
0.2538
0.3089
2.08%
Table 3. User evaluation of generated head avatars.
User
Geometry
Texture
Consistency
Preference ↑
Quality
Quality
with Text
Fantasia3D
0.4%
2.0%
1.9%
HumanNorm
5.6%
22.7%
6.7%
TextDeformer
24.2%
-
2.3%
TADA
3.9%
13.1%
22.2%
Ours
65.9%
62.2%
66.9%
Mesh Quality.
We evaluate mesh quality through


self-intersection.
Since the mesh from Fantasia3D and
HumanNorm are extracted through the marching cubes
algorithm [33], the produced triangles have no self-
intersections.
Therefore, we only compared our method
with TADA and TextDeformer. Unlike our method, direct
vertex displacement tends to converge to a local minimum
and disregards the triangulation of the mesh.
Figure 6. Ablation study on the vector fields. The per-triangle H
can enhance the identity and character features of the avatar.
User Study. We conducted a user study to evaluate the
robustness and expressiveness of our method with 18 dis-
tinct text prompts, 6 of which are from TADA. We used a
Google Form to assess 1) geometry quality, 2) texture qual-
ity, and 3) consistency with text. We recruited 46 partici-
pants, of whom 26 are graduate students majoring in com-
puter graphics and vision, and 20 are company employees
specializing in AI content generation. In this form, the par-
ticipants were instructed to choose the preferred renderings
of head avatars from different methods in randomized or-
der, as shown in Table 3. The results show that participants
preferred our method by a significant margin (over 60%).
4.4. Ablation Study
Effect of Vector field. We conducted three sets of qual-
itative comparisons to demonstrate the effectiveness of the
per-triangle vector field H. As shown in Figure 6, using Ja-
cobian J alone tends to overly smooth the gradients, lead-
ing to a loss of distinctive character features. Increasing
J’s learning rate emphasizes character identities but distorts
meshes and causes self-intersections. Additionally, our ex-
periments introduce the scalar field S, which represents the
isotropic scaling by setting diagonal elements of each Hi to
equal values. The results indicate that anisotropic scaling
guided through H generates avatars bearing more geome-
try details and character features than those through S (e.g.,
Figure 7. Learning rate (LR) tuning. Supported by our experi-
ments, adding per-triangle H through W can enhance the identity
and character features of the avatar from the text prompt.
Figure 8. Preserved semantic consistency (e.g., 3D landmarks and
dense segmentation) with our deformation-based framework.
the eyebrow of ”Octopus Alien” and the ear of ”Goblin”).
Furthermore, we demonstrate the tuning process of the LR
to evaluate that the addition of H effectively enhances the
stability and expressiveness of deformations when the LR
of J is set in the reasonable range (e.g., between 0.01 to
0.025). In Figure 7, we provide the best LR settings, which
are 0.015 for H and 0.01 for J. We also demonstrate the
versatility of the vector field by applying it to the object
generation framework (Figure 10), observing that the use of
H accelerates optimization convergence to desired defor-
mation states compared to using Jacobians alone.
Regularization. In deformation optimization, facial fea-
tures and head poses may deviate unexpectedly.
Land-
mark regularization constrains generated meshes to the in-
put shape’s canonical space, and contour-based regulariza-
tion contributes to reasonable head shapes. We demonstrate
the effectiveness of our regularization designs in Figure 11.
5. Applications
Our method produces head avatars that can be smoothly
manipulated (e.g., animated via 3DMMs and text-based
editing) and are compatible with graphics tools such as
Blender and Maya.
Compared with implicit representa-
tions [6, 14], our method enables artists to animate and
edit head avatar assets for downstream applications (Fig-
ures 1(c) and 17).


Figure 9. Avatar generation with various template mesh inputs.
The meshes from (a) an arbitrary head model and (b) SMPL-
X [36] are deformed to align text descriptions respectively.
Figure 10. Generalization experiments.
We implement vector
fields in TextDeformer [9] and find that our method accelerates
mesh optimizations to approach text guidance in early epochs.
Local geometry editing. Besides manipulating gener-
ated meshes in 3D software as artists usually do, our ap-
proach also supports efficient head editing with text descrip-
tions (Figures 1(b) and 14). Only Hi on certain parts is op-
timized given the text guidance.
Texture editing through text guidance. Our approach
encourages independent texture generation on a fixed ge-
ometry, which enables texture editing specified by the text
input (Figure 20). Some unexpected color artifacts may be
introduced due to the noises from the diffusion model.
Avatar animation. As shown in Figures 1(c) and 13, we
demonstrate that the rigging and blendshapes of the head
Figure 11. Ablation study on regularization. The contour-based
and landmark regularizations contribute to maintaining symmetric
facial features and alignment with the pose of the input mesh.
Figure 12. Our deformation-based framework offers effective ge-
ometry consistency for further 3D applications.
mesh model after deformation are well-preserved for creat-
ing head animations and shape manipulations.
Avatar generation from other template meshes. As
detailed in Section 3, our method accommodates manifold
meshes, not just specific models like FLAME. Figure 9 ex-
emplifies a ”Superman” head creation without labeled 3D
facial landmarks, using crafted 3D assets.
6. Limitations and Future Work
Our framework has a few limitations. Although many
parametric head models do not contain eyeball mesh intrin-
sically (e.g., Facescape [52], NPHM [11], and BFM [10]),
our experiments removed the eyeball mesh from FLAME
and SMPL-X since Jacobians rely on the manifold mesh
structure [39] (Figure 4.1).
A cage-based representation
may offer deformations among multiple mesh instances si-
multaneously [53], enabling separately editable details like
hair and accessories. Another minor limitation exists in that
lighting isn’t disentangled from diffuse colors, potentially
causing noise and oversaturation artifacts.
It is worth mentioning that the generated avatars exhibit
relatively good geometry consistency with texture (Fig-
ure 12), but our method cannot guarantee an exact match be-
tween geometry and texture. For instance, eyeball appear-


ance only shows in the texture, a problem that also occurs in
TADA and HumanNorm. Stronger semantic labeling (e.g.,
canny edges [37]) may mitigate this issue. Another future
focus is to learn head generation from a 3D sphere without
any avatar shape priors [35].
Figure 13. Example of attribute inheritance from FLAME [28]. If
the input template mesh is from 3DMMs [4], users could manip-
ulate the deformed mesh freely via morphable attributes such as
expression and shape parameters.
7. Conclusion
In this paper, we have presented a text-guided generative
framework for crafting stylized 3D head avatars through
learnable deformations. By employing Jacobians as an in-
termediate representation for vertex displacements and en-
hancing them with a learnable vector field, our method
has improved the expressiveness of the deformed mesh.
Consequently, learnable deformations are embedded into
score distillation for geometry and appearance generation.
Our regularization terms help retain 3D attributes from the
source mesh to support seamless editing by artists. Experi-
ments with various text prompts exhibit the remarkable per-
formance of our framework. Our work can inform future
research on effectively integrating mesh-based neural tech-
niques into practical graphics pipelines, such as boosting
the 2D and 3D deformation ability by applying our method
to APAP [55].
8. Acknowledgement
This project is sponsored by CCF-Tencent Rhino-Bird
Open Research Fund RAGR20230120.
References
[1] Noam Aigerman, Kunal Gupta, Vladimir G. Kim, Siddhartha
Chaudhuri, Jun Saito, and Thibault Groueix.
Neural Ja-
cobian Fields: Learning Intrinsic Mappings of Arbitrary
Meshes. ACM Trans. Graph., 41(4), Jul 2022.
[2] Shivangi Aneja, Justus Thies, Angela Dai, and Matthias
Nießner.
ClipFace: Text-Guided Editing of Textured 3D
Morphable Models. In ACM SIGGRAPH 2023 Conference
Proceedings, SIGGRAPH ’23, New York, NY, USA, 2023.
Association for Computing Machinery.
[3] Stephen W. Bailey, Dalton Omens, Paul Dilorenzo, and
James F. O’Brien. Fast and Deep Facial Deformations. ACM
Trans. Graph., 39(4), Aug 2020.
[4] Volker Blanz and Thomas Vetter. A Morphable Model for
the Synthesis of 3D Faces.
In Proceedings of the 26th
Annual Conference on Computer Graphics and Interactive
Techniques, SIGGRAPH ’99, pages 187–194, USA, 1999.
ACM Press/Addison-Wesley Publishing Co.
[5] Yukang Cao, Yan-Pei Cao, Kai Han, Ying Shan, and Kwan-
Yee K Wong. DreamAvatar: Text-and-Shape Guided 3D Hu-
man Avatar Generation via Diffusion Models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2304.00916, 2023.
[6] Rui Chen, Yongwei Chen, Ningxin Jiao, and Kui Jia. Fanta-
sia3D: Disentangling Geometry and Appearance for High-
quality Text-to-3D Content Creation.
In Proceedings of
the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision
(ICCV), pages 22246–22256, October 2023.
[7] Isabel Fitton, Christopher Clarke, Jeremy Dalton, Michael J.
Proulx, and Christof Lutteroth. Dancing with the Avatars:
Minimal Avatar Customisation Enhances Learning in a Psy-
chomotor Task. In Proceedings of the 2023 CHI Conference
on Human Factors in Computing Systems, CHI ’23, New
York, NY, USA, 2023. Association for Computing Machin-
ery.
[8] Lin Gao, Jie Yang, Yi-Ling Qiao, Yu-Kun Lai, Paul L. Rosin,
Weiwei Xu, and Shihong Xia. Automatic Unpaired Shape
Deformation Transfer. ACM Trans. Graph., 37(6), Dec 2018.
[9] William Gao, Noam Aigerman, Thibault Groueix, Vova
Kim, and Rana Hanocka. TextDeformer: Geometry Manipu-
lation Using Text Guidance. In ACM SIGGRAPH 2023 Con-
ference Proceedings, SIGGRAPH ’23, New York, NY, USA,
2023. Association for Computing Machinery.
[10] Thomas Gerig, Andreas Morel-Forster, Clemens Blumer,
Bernhard Egger, Marcel Luthi, Sandro Schoenborn, and
Thomas Vetter. Morphable Face Models - An Open Frame-
work. In 13th IEEE International Conference on Automatic
Face & Gesture Recognition (FG 2018), pages 75–82, 2018.
[11] Simon Giebenhain, Tobias Kirschstein, Markos Georgopou-
los, Martin R¨unz, Lourdes Agapito, and Matthias Nießner.
Learning Neural Parametric Head Models. In Proc. IEEE
Conf. on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR),
2023.
[12] Ian Goodfellow, Jean Pouget-Abadie, Mehdi Mirza, Bing
Xu, David Warde-Farley, Sherjil Ozair, Aaron Courville, and
Yoshua Bengio. Generative Adversarial Nets. Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems, 27, 2014.


[13] Ian Goodfellow, Jean Pouget-Abadie, Mehdi Mirza, Bing
Xu, David Warde-Farley, Sherjil Ozair, Aaron Courville, and
Yoshua Bengio. Generative Adversarial Networks. Commun.
ACM, 63(11):139–144, oct 2020.
[14] Xiao Han, Yukang Cao, Kai Han, Xiatian Zhu, Jiankang
Deng, Yi-Zhe Song, Tao Xiang, and Kwan-Yee K Wong.
HeadSculpt: Crafting 3D Head Avatars with Text. In Thirty-
seventh Conference on Neural Information Processing Sys-
tems, 2023.
[15] Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. Denoising Dif-
fusion Probabilistic Models. volume 33, 2020.
[16] Andrew Hogue, Sunbir Gill, and Michael Jenkin. Automated
Avatar Creation for 3D Games. In Proceedings of the 2007
Conference on Future Play, Future Play ’07, page 174–180,
New York, NY, USA, 2007. Association for Computing Ma-
chinery.
[17] Fangzhou Hong, Mingyuan Zhang, Liang Pan, Zhongang
Cai, Lei Yang, and Ziwei Liu. AvatarCLIP: Zero-Shot Text-
Driven Generation and Animation of 3D Avatars.
ACM
Transactions on Graphics (TOG), 41(4):1–19, 2022.
[18] Fangzhou Hong, Mingyuan Zhang, Liang Pan, Zhongang
Cai, Lei Yang, and Ziwei Liu. AvatarCLIP: Zero-shot Text-
driven Generation and Animation of 3D Avatars.
ACM
Transactions on Graphics (TOG), 41(4):1–19, 2022.
[19] Liwen Hu, Shunsuke Saito, Lingyu Wei, Koki Nagano, Jae-
woo Seo, Jens Fursund, Iman Sadeghi, Carrie Sun, Yen-
Chun Chen, and Hao Li. Avatar Digitization from a Single
Image for Real-time Rendering. ACM Trans. Graph., 36(6),
Nov 2017.
[20] Xin Huang, Ruizhi Shao, Qi Zhang, Hongwen Zhang, Ying
Feng, Yebin Liu, and Qing Wang.
HumanNorm: Learn-
ing Normal Diffusion Model for High-quality and Realistic
3D Human Generation.
In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
(CVPR), pages 4568–4577, June 2024.
[21] Yukun Huang, Jianan Wang, Ailing Zeng, He Cao, Xianbiao
Qi, Yukai Shi, Zheng-Jun Zha, and Lei Zhang. DreamWaltz:
Make a Scene with Complex 3D Animatable Avatars, 2023.
[22] Dong Huo, Zixin Guo, Xinxin Zuo, Zhihao Shi, Juwei
Lu, Peng Dai, Songcen Xu, Li Cheng, and Yee-Hong
Yang. TexGen: Text-Guided 3D Texture Generation with
Multi-view Sampling and Resampling.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2408.01291, 2024.
[23] Sungwon
Hwang,
Junha
Hyung,
and
Jaegul
Choo.
Text2Control3D: Controllable 3D Avatar Generation in Neu-
ral Radiance Fields using Geometry-Guided Text-to-Image
Diffusion Model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.03550, 2023.
[24] Ruixiang Jiang, Can Wang, Jingbo Zhang, Menglei Chai,
Mingming He, Dongdong Chen, and Jing Liao.
Avatar-
Craft: Transforming Text into Neural Human Avatars with
Parameterized Shape and Pose Control. In Proceedings of
the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision
(ICCV), pages 14371–14382, October 2023.
[25] Adhik
Joshi
and
Akash
Guptag.
Realistic
Vi-
sion
5.1.
https://huggingface.co/
stablediffusionapi/realistic-vision-51,
2023. Accessed: 2024-05-10.
[26] Nikos Kolotouros, Thiemo Alldieck, Andrei Zanfir, Ed-
uard Gabriel Bazavan, Mihai Fieraru, and Cristian Sminchis-
escu. DreamHuman: Animatable 3D Avatars from Text. In
Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on Neural
Information Processing Systems, NIPS ’23, Red Hook, NY,
USA, 2024. Curran Associates Inc.
[27] Ruilong Li, Karl Bladin, Yajie Zhao, Chinmay Chinara,
Owen Ingraham, Pengda Xiang, Xinglei Ren, Pratusha
Prasad, Bipin Kishore, Jun Xing, and Hao Li. Learning For-
mation of Physically-Based Face Attributes. In IEEE/CVF
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
(CVPR), June 2020.
[28] Tianye Li, Timo Bolkart, Michael J. Black, Hao Li, and
Javier Romero. Learning a Model of Facial Shape and Ex-
pression from 4D Scans. ACM Trans. Graph., 36(6):194–1,
2017.
[29] Yixun Liang, Xin Yang, Jiantao Lin, Haodong Li, Xiaogang
Xu, and Yingcong Chen.
LucidDreamer: Towards High-
Fidelity Text-to-3D Generation via Interval Score Matching.
In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pages 6517–6526,
June 2024.
[30] Tingting Liao, Hongwei Yi, Yuliang Xiu, Jiaxiang Tang,
Yangyi Huang, Justus Thies, and Michael J. Black. TADA!
Text to Animatable Digital Avatars. In 2024 International
Conference on 3D Vision (3DV), pages 1508–1519. IEEE,
2024.
[31] Chen-Hsuan Lin, Jun Gao, Luming Tang, Towaki Takikawa,
Xiaohui Zeng, Xun Huang, Karsten Kreis, Sanja Fi-
dler, Ming-Yu Liu, and Tsung-Yi Lin.
Magic3D: High-
Resolution Text-to-3D Content Creation. In Proceedings of
the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, pages 300–309, 2023.
[32] Hongyu Liu, Xuan Wang, Ziyu Wan, Yujun Shen, Yib-
ing Song, Jing Liao, and Qifeng Chen. HeadArtist: Text-
conditioned 3D Head Generation with Self Score Distilla-
tion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.07539, 2023.
[33] William E. Lorensen and Harvey E. Cline. Marching Cubes:
A High Resolution 3D Surface Construction Algorithm. In
Proceedings of the 14th Annual Conference on Computer
Graphics and Interactive Techniques, SIGGRAPH ’87, page
163–169, New York, NY, USA, 1987. Association for Com-
puting Machinery.
[34] Camillo Lugaresi, Jiuqiang Tang, Hadon Nash, Chris Mc-
Clanahan, Esha Uboweja, Michael Hays, Fan Zhang, Chuo-
Ling Chang, Ming Guang Yong, Juhyun Lee, Wan-Teh
Chang, Wei Hua, Manfred Georg, and Matthias Grundmann.
MediaPipe: A Framework for Building Perception Pipelines.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.08172, 2019.
[35] Baptiste Nicolet, Alec Jacobson, and Wenzel Jakob. Large
Steps in Inverse Rendering of Geometry.
ACM Trans.
Graph., 40(6), Dec 2021.
[36] Georgios Pavlakos, Vasileios Choutas, Nima Ghorbani,
Timo Bolkart, Ahmed A. A. Osman, Dimitrios Tzionas, and
Michael J. Black.
Expressive Body Capture: 3D Hands,
Face, and Body from a Single Image. In Proceedings IEEE
Conf. on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR),
pages 10975–10985, 2019.
