Title: Relightable full-body gaussian codec avatars

Relightable Full-Body Gaussian Codec Avatars
SHAOFEI WANG∗, ETH Zürich, Switzerland
TOMAS SIMON, Codec Avatars Lab, Meta, USA
IGOR SANTESTEBAN, Codec Avatars Lab, Meta, USA
TIMUR BAGAUTDINOV, Codec Avatars Lab, Meta, USA
JUNXUAN LI, Codec Avatars Lab, Meta, USA
VASU AGRAWAL, Codec Avatars Lab, Meta, USA
FABIAN PRADA, Codec Avatars Lab, Meta, USA
SHOOU-I YU, Codec Avatars Lab, Meta, USA
PACE NALBONE, Codec Avatars Lab, Meta, USA
MATT GRAMLICH, Codec Avatars Lab, Meta, USA
ROMAN LUBACHERSKY, Codec Avatars Lab, Meta, USA
CHENGLEI WU, Codec Avatars Lab, Meta, USA
JAVIER ROMERO, Codec Avatars Lab, Meta, USA
JASON SARAGIH, Codec Avatars Lab, Meta, USA
MICHAEL ZOLLHOEFER, Codec Avatars Lab, Meta, USA
ANDREAS GEIGER, University of Tübingen, Germany
SIYU TANG, ETH Zürich, Switzerland
SHUNSUKE SAITO, Codec Avatars Lab, Meta, USA
Relightable Full-body Avatar
Env. map relighting
Close-ups
Intrinsic decomp.
(normal/diffuse/specular)
Animation
(unseen pose/rendering)
Fig. 1. Relightable Full Body Gaussian Codec Avatars. We present the first approach that enables reconstruction, relighting and expressive animation of full-
body avatars including body, face, and hands. Our approach combines learned, orientation-dependent diffuse radiance transport and deferred-shading-based
specular radiance transport to enable complex light transport such as global illumination for fully articulated human bodies.
∗Work was done during an internship at Meta
Authors’ addresses: Shaofei Wang, ETH Zürich, Switzerland, shaofei.wang@inf.ethz.ch;
Tomas Simon, Codec Avatars Lab, Meta, USA, tsimon@meta.com; Igor Santesteban,
Codec Avatars Lab, Meta, USA, igor.santesteban@gmail.com; Timur Bagautdinov, Codec
Avatars Lab, Meta, USA, timurb@meta.com; Junxuan Li, Codec Avatars Lab, Meta, USA,
junxuanli@meta.com; Vasu Agrawal, Codec Avatars Lab, Meta, USA, vasuagrawal@
meta.com; Fabian Prada, Codec Avatars Lab, Meta, USA, fabianprada@meta.com; Shoou-
I Yu, Codec Avatars Lab, Meta, USA, shoou-i.yu@meta.com; Pace Nalbone, Codec
Avatars Lab, Meta, USA, pacenalbone@meta.com; Matt Gramlich, Codec Avatars Lab,
Meta, USA, matthewgramlich@meta.com; Roman Lubachersky, Codec Avatars Lab,
Meta, USA, rlubachersky@meta.com; Chenglei Wu, Codec Avatars Lab, Meta, USA,
chenglei@meta.com; Javier Romero, Codec Avatars Lab, Meta, USA, javierromero1@
meta.com; Jason Saragih, Codec Avatars Lab, Meta, USA, jsaragih@meta.com; Michael
Zollhoefer, Codec Avatars Lab, Meta, USA, zollhoefer@meta.com; Andreas Geiger,
University of Tübingen, Germany, a.geiger@uni-tuebingen.de; Siyu Tang, ETH Zürich,
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
We propose Relightable Full-Body Gaussian Codec Avatars, a new approach
for modeling relightable full-body avatars with fine-grained details including
face and hands. The unique challenge for relighting full-body avatars lies
in the large deformations caused by body articulation and the resulting
Switzerland, siyu.tang@inf.ethz.ch; Shunsuke Saito, Codec Avatars Lab, Meta, USA,
shunsuke.saito16@gmail.com.
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a
fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
© 2025 Association for Computing Machinery.
0730-0301/2025/1-ART $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/nnnnnnn.nnnnnnn
ACM Trans. Graph., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: January 2025.
arXiv:2501.14726v1  [cs.CV]  24 Jan 2025


2
•
Wang, S. et al
impact on appearance caused by light transport. Changes in body pose
can dramatically change the orientation of body surfaces with respect to
lights, resulting in both local appearance changes due to changes in local
light transport functions, as well as non-local changes due to occlusion
between body parts. To address this, we decompose the light transport into
local and non-local effects. Local appearance changes are modeled using
learnable zonal harmonics for diffuse radiance transfer. Unlike spherical
harmonics, zonal harmonics are highly efficient to rotate under articulation.
This allows us to learn diffuse radiance transfer in a local coordinate frame,
which disentangles the local radiance transfer from the articulation of the
body. To account for non-local appearance changes, we introduce a shadow
network that predicts shadows given precomputed incoming irradiance on a
base mesh. This facilitates the learning of non-local shadowing between the
body parts. Finally, we use a deferred shading approach to model specular
radiance transfer and better capture reflections and highlights such as eye
glints. We demonstrate that our approach successfully models both the local
and non-local light transport required for relightable full-body avatars, with
a superior generalization ability under novel illumination conditions and
unseen poses.
CCS Concepts: • Computing methodologies →Reconstruction; Ani-
mation.
Additional Key Words and Phrases: 3D Avatar Creation, Neural Rendering
ACM Reference Format:
Shaofei Wang, Tomas Simon, Igor Santesteban, Timur Bagautdinov, Junxuan
Li, Vasu Agrawal, Fabian Prada, Shoou-I Yu, Pace Nalbone, Matt Gramlich,
Roman Lubachersky, Chenglei Wu, Javier Romero, Jason Saragih, Michael
Zollhoefer, Andreas Geiger, Siyu Tang, and Shunsuke Saito. 2025. Relightable
Full-Body Gaussian Codec Avatars. ACM Trans. Graph. 1, 1 (January 2025),
14 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/nnnnnnn.nnnnnnn
1
INTRODUCTION
Building drivable full-body avatars is a long-standing challenge
in computer vision and graphics. Early approaches focused on re-
constructing the geometry and appearance of the human body for
free-viewpoint rendering and video playback [Collet et al. 2015;
Prada et al. 2017; Starck and Hilton 2007]. While achieving high-
fidelity appearance and geometry, these methods are limited in their
ability to animate the avatars under novel illumination conditions.
Later works recover intrinsic properties of the human body [Guo
et al. 2019; Zhang et al. 2021], face [Bi et al. 2021; Yang et al. 2023],
and hands [Chen et al. 2024b; Iwase et al. 2023] to enable animation
and relighting. Among these approaches, [Chen et al. 2024b; Guo
et al. 2019; Zhang et al. 2021] employ mesh-based representations,
which often fail to model translucency and fine-scale geometric
details such as hair. [Iwase et al. 2023; Yang et al. 2023] employ a
mixture of volumetric primitives [Lombardi et al. 2021] that bet-
ter captures fine-scale geometric detail compared to mesh-based
representations, but tends to blur out certain geometric detail such
as individual hair strands. On the other hand, most religthtable
appearance representations are also suboptimal: [Guo et al. 2019]
employs a physically based rendering model that omits global illu-
mination due to performance concern, thus producing unrealistic
human skins. [Bi et al. 2021; Chen et al. 2024b; Iwase et al. 2023;
Yang et al. 2023; Zhang et al. 2021] utilize neural relighting to predict
relit appearance given the illumination as input. These approaches
can capture global illumination effects but often produce blurry ap-
pearance due to the limited expressiveness of the employed neural
network.
Contrary to the aforementioned approaches, [Saito et al. 2024]
explores 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS [Kerbl et al. 2023]) to rep-
resent the geometry and appearance of head avatars and could
represent highly detailed geometry such as individual hair strands.
The approach also employs a learnable radiance transfer function to
account for global illumination effects. The learned radiance transfer
leverages spherical harmonics to model diffuse shading ( [Sloan et al.
2002]) and to capture low-frequency global illumination effects such
as subsurface scattering of human skin. In addition, specular radi-
ance transfer is modeled based on a spherical Gaussian model [Green
et al. 2006; Wang et al. 2009] to account for all-frequency illumina-
tion effects, such as eye glints and skin reflections. Both components
are directly compatible with conventional real-time rendering en-
gines.
In this paper, we propose Relightable Full-Body Gaussian Codec
Avatars, the first approach to jointly model the relightable appear-
ance of the body, face, and hands of drivable avatars. We build upon
the insights of [Saito et al. 2024], using 3DGS as the underlying
representation, while employing learned radiance transfer to model
relightable appearance. We note that there are several challenges to
extend the appearance model of [Saito et al. 2024] to handle fully
articulated bodies: (1) the diffuse light transport model based on
spherical harmonics in [Saito et al. 2024] assumes that light sources
can be mapped to a single local coordinate frame (i.e., the head co-
ordinate frame), which does not hold for articulated bodies, where
each body part has its own local coordinate frame. (2) Articulated
bodies also exhibit complex shadowing effects caused by occlusions
between body parts, which are not considered in [Saito et al. 2024].
(3) Full-body models usually have a limited representational bud-
get for modeling facial details compared to head-specific methods.
Naive splatting restricts resolution to the local Gaussian density,
requiring many Gaussians for fine details. Moreover, because the res-
olution for specular reflections depends on both surface properties
and the environment’s frequency content, modeling specularities at
the Gaussian level forces an undesirable link between reflection fre-
quency and Gaussian density, resulting in an under-representation
of facial details such as eye glints.
To address the first challenge, we replace the diffuse light trans-
port model based on spherical harmonic with zonal harmonics [Sloan
et al. 2005], a representation that can be learned in the local coor-
dinate frame and efficiently rotated to world coordinates, yielding
distinct light transport effects for different body articulations with a
single parameterization. In particular, zonal harmonics enable us to
construct radiance transfer functions in world coordinates by effi-
ciently rotating learned zonal harmonics parameters, circumventing
the need to map light sources to the local coordinate frames of each
body part.
Regarding shadow modeling, several recent full-body avatar works
have proposed to use ray tracing to account for shadowing ef-
fects [Chen et al. 2024c; Chen and Liu 2022; Li et al. 2024b; Lin
et al. 2024; Wang et al. 2024; Xu et al. 2024]. They require expensive
ray tracing of several rays per pixel at each optimization step in
order to capture the shadows cast by intricate structures such as
ACM Trans. Graph., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: January 2025.


Relightable Full-Body Gaussian Codec Avatars
•
3
cloth wrinkles. In contrast, our learned radiance transfer function
captures local shadows well but struggles with non-local shadows
caused by distant self-occlusions. We thus propose to learn a shadow
network that is dedicated to predict the shadows caused by body
articulation, given as input the normalized incoming irradiance on a
coarse-tracked mesh. The shadow network is inspired by [Bagautdi-
nov et al. 2021] but is adapted to the setting of a relightable appear-
ance model. Specifically, we ensure that the irradiance is normalized
in a physically based way, such that the learned shadow network
generalizes to novel illumination conditions. Lastly, to address the
reduced quality in specular rendering, we take inspiration from de-
ferred shading [Deering et al. 1988; Gao et al. 2020; Thies et al. 2019;
Ye et al. 2024] and propose to model specular radiance transfer with
deferred shading, which achieves high-fidelity specular reflections
for the face region.
In summary, we make the following contributions:
• We propose the first relightable full-body avatar model that
jointly models the relightable appearance of the human body,
face, and hands for high-fidelity relighting and animation.
• To handle full-body articulations with global light transport,
we propose learnable zonal harmonics to represent local dif-
fuse radiance transfer in the local coordinate frames of each
Gaussian. This results in a reduced number of parameters
and improved rendering quality compared to the commonly
used spherical harmonics representation.
• We reformulate the learnable radiance transfer to explicitly
decompose non-local shadowing, and propose a dedicated
shadow network to predict shadows caused by the articula-
tion of the body. We also propose a physically based irradiance
normalization scheme to ensure that the shadow network can
generalize to novel illumination conditions such as unseen
environment maps.
• We show that deferred shading can be used for our learned
specular radiance transfer function. This achieves high-fidelity
specular reflections for relightable human avatar modeling
without excessively increasing the number of Gaussians.
2
RELATED WORK
2.1
Full-Body Avatar Representations
Mesh-based representations are popular because they provide a na-
tive integration with existing graphics pipelines [Loper et al. 2015].
Existing approaches for building mesh-based animatable avatar
models use pose- and latent-code conditioned neural networks to
predict textures and geometry deformations in UV space [Bagautdi-
nov et al. 2021; Grigorev et al. 2019; Xiang et al. 2022, 2023] or on
top of graph-based representations [Habermann et al. 2021]. More
faithful reconstructions require more expressive representations
than meshes. Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) [Mildenhall et al. 2021]
have powered a number of methods for neural rendering of hu-
man bodies [Jiang et al. 2022; Li et al. 2022b; Liu et al. 2021; Peng
et al. 2021; Su et al. 2022, 2021; Wang et al. 2022; Weng et al. 2022].
These methods typically employ a NeRF conditioned on human
motion, either in world or canonical space, by warping the rays
with an articulated model for better generalization. On the other
hand, they are often limited by the slow training/inference speed of
NeRF. [Chen et al. 2023; Remelli et al. 2022] utilize an efficient vari-
ant of NeRF, i.e. mixture of volumetric primitives [Lombardi et al.
2021] to enable both faithful reconstruction and real-time rendering.
Aside from NeRF, point-based representations [Prokudin et al. 2023;
Su et al. 2023; Zheng et al. 2023] allow for more flexible topology
modeling and exploit the notion of locality, which leads to more
parameter-efficient models and better generalization.
Most recently, 3D Gaussian Splatting [Kerbl et al. 2023] (3DGS)
enabled both the high-performance of point-based representations
and the expressiveness of radiance fields by modeling the scene with
learnable Gaussian primitives. 3DGS has been extended to support
dynamic scenes [Luiten et al. 2023], and subsequently several works
introduced neural representations [Hu and Liu 2024; Li et al. 2024c;
Pang et al. 2024; Qian et al. 2024; Zielonka et al. 2023] incorporating
3DGS-based appearance with articulated geometry priors to enable
animatable full-body models. [Zielonka et al. 2023] embeds Gaussian
primitives into tetrahedral cages, as opposed to a commonly used
linear blend skinning geometry proxy, with compositional payload
produced by pose-conditioned MLPs. [Li et al. 2024c; Pang et al.
2024] parameterize the Gaussian primitives on a pre-defined UV
texture space, and deploys a convolutional network in UV-space
to decode highly detailed pose-dependent Gaussian appearance
and deformations. [Hu and Liu 2024; Qian et al. 2024] map a set of
Gaussians - initialized with a SMPL [Loper et al. 2015] template in
canonical space, using a standard linear blend skinning (LBS) model
coupled with a learnable non-rigid deformation model. In this work,
we also build upon 3DGS due to its efficiency and expressiveness. We
note that most of the aforementioned methods focus on animation
and novel view synthesis, while perceptually realistic relighting of
full-body avatars is rarely explored in the literature, as discussed in
the next section.
2.2
Avatar Relighting
Recent portrait relighting methods [Ji et al. 2022; Kanamori and
Endo 2018; Kim et al. 2024; Pandey et al. 2021; Sun et al. 2019]
employ learning-based techniques operating in image space. [Sun
et al. 2019] uses an encoder-decoder neural network trained on
light stage data to regress the subject’s appearance under novel
illumination conditions. [Kim et al. 2024] proposes an image-space
approach that incorporates physics-based decomposition and relies
on self-supervised pre-training to improve generalization from lim-
ited light-stage data. [He et al. 2024] employs diffusion models [Ho
et al. 2020; Rombach et al. 2022; Song et al. 2021a,b] to predict relit
images of human faces given conditioning face images and light
information. Although promising, image-based techniques often
produce geometrically and temporally inconsistent results due to
their limited ability to model 3D consistency.
Physically based rendering (PBR) techniques aim at estimating
approximate properties of the underlying material based on an ap-
proximate physics model. Relightables [Guo et al. 2019] recover
detailed intrinsic properties of the human body from light-stage
data using a mesh and PBR appearance model. Relighting4D [Chen
and Liu 2022] aims to obtain relightable avatars from sparse-view
or monocular videos with unknown light sources using a physically
based decomposition of the scene, where the neural fields produce
ACM Trans. Graph., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: January 2025.


4
•
Wang, S. et al
normal, occlusion, diffuse, and specular components rendered with
a physically based renderer. Later works [Chen et al. 2024c; Li et al.
2024b; Lin et al. 2024; Wang et al. 2024; Xu et al. 2024; Zheng et al.
2024] learn such avatars in canonical spaces to facilitate animation
while employing explicit ray tracing to enhance the realism of re-
lighting. In general, PBR is not designed for efficient modeling of
global illumination effects which are crucial for rendering percep-
tually realistic images. Rendering global illumination effects with
PBR requires multi-bounce path tracing which is prohibitively slow
for gradient-based optimization of dynamic avatar models. [Bi et al.
2021; Yang et al. 2023; Zhang et al. 2021] propose to use neural re-
lighting along with a 3D head model to achieve global illumination
effects while being 3D consistent. Neural relighting with shadow
conditioning has also been explored for relightable hands [Chen
et al. 2024b; Iwase et al. 2023] exhibit more articulation compared
to the human head, but their bottleneck-based neural relighting
methods with mesh or mixture of volumetric primitives are unable
to capture high-frequency specularities and geometric details as
shown in [Saito et al. 2024]. Contrary to all aforementioned methods,
our approach utilizes a 3D-consistent representation [Kerbl et al.
2023] with learnable radiance transfer functions [Saito et al. 2024] to
model the relightable appearance. This ensures 3D-consistent and
high-fidelity relighting of full-body avatars in an efficient manner,
for both seen and unseen poses.
2.3
Learned Radiance Transfer
Modeling global illumination effects is a long-standing challenge in
computer graphics [Pharr et al. 2023]. While PBR with Monte Carlo
path tracing is the most accurate method for rendering global illu-
mination effects, it is not amenable to real-time applications due to
its high computational cost. To address this, precomputed radiance
transfer (PRT) [Sloan et al. 2002] has been proposed for real-time
rendering of global illumination effects. PRT approximates the light
transport function using a set of compact basis functions such as
spherical harmonics (SH), which reduces shading computations to
simple dot products between the SH coefficients of the illumination
and the transfer coefficients. Follow-up works have extended PRT
to handle all frequency lighting [Green et al. 2006; Ng et al. 2003;
Tsai and Shih 2006; Wang et al. 2009] and learning via neural net-
works [Lyu et al. 2022; Rainer et al. 2022; Xu et al. 2022]. Regarding
dynamic scenes such as dynamic human heads, both [Li et al. 2022a]
and [Saito et al. 2024] learn diffuse light transport functions as sets
of spherical harmonic coefficients. We find that this representation
is not sufficient to capture diffuse appearance changes due to full-
body articulations. Inspired by [Sloan et al. 2005], we choose Zonal
Harmonics (ZH) to construct orientation-dependent light transport
functions. Instead of aligning zonal harmonics with known SH coef-
ficients as in [Sloan et al. 2005], we propose to learn zonal harmonics
directly from light stage data in an end-to-end manner, together
with the other intrinsic properties. They can yield distinct light
transport functions efficiently given different orientations of the
primitives. This allows us to learn complex, orientation-dependent
light transport for full-body avatars from image observations only.
The learned view-dependent specular radiance transfer of [Saito
et al. 2024] based on spherical Gaussians [Wang et al. 2009], on the
other hand, can be directly applied to full-body avatars by map-
ping camera viewing directions into local coordinate frames of 3D
Gaussians. However, we observe that this approach performs poorly
in highly specular regions when the number of Gaussians is lim-
ited. To address this, we propose to combine deferred shading with
the learnable radiance transfer by rasterizing not only physically
based properties (roughness and normals) but also light transport
coefficients (visibility). While deferred shading has been explored
with 3DGS [Ye et al. 2024], we are the first to utilize it for learnable
radiance transfer.
3
METHOD
In this section, we describe in detail our method for relightable
full-body avatars as shown in Fig. 2.
3.1
Geometry
We represent full-body avatar as a collection of 3D Gaussians and
employ 3D Gaussian splatting [Kerbl et al. 2023] to render the avatar.
Similarly to [Saito et al. 2024], we associate a Gaussian primitive with
properties g𝑘= {t𝑘, R𝑘, s𝑘,𝑜𝑘, 𝜌𝑘, z𝑐
𝑘, z𝑚
𝑘, n𝑘, 𝑣𝑘, 𝜎𝑘}. The geometry
of the primitive is defined by a translation t𝑘∈R3, a rotation
R𝑘∈𝑆𝑂(3) represented as a quaternion, per-axis scales s𝑘∈R3,
and an opacity value 𝑜𝑘∈[0, 1]. The appearance is defined by
albedo 𝜌𝑘∈R3, diffuse light transport coefficients z𝑐
𝑘, z𝑚
𝑘, specular
normal n𝑘∈S2, specular visibility 𝑣𝑘∈[0, 1], and roughness
𝜎𝑘. The geometry of the 𝑘-th Gaussian primitive is modeled as an
unnormalized 3D Gaussian kernel G𝑘:
G𝑘(x) = exp

−1
2 (x −t𝑘)𝑇Σ−1
𝑘
(x −t𝑘)

,
(1)
s.t.
Σ𝑘= R𝑘diag(s)diag(s)𝑇R𝑇
𝑘
In order to render pixels in image space, [Kerbl et al. 2023] uses an
additional function P(G𝑘,𝑢, 𝑣) that projects the 3D Gaussian primi-
tive onto the image plane [Zwicker et al. 2002], and evaluates the
Gaussian kernel value at the projected pixel location (𝑢, 𝑣). The final
color of a pixel is computed by blending the colors of all Gaussians,
sorted by their depth wrt. the camera:
C(𝑢, 𝑣) =
∑︁
𝑘=1
c𝑘𝑜𝑘P(G𝑘,𝑢, 𝑣)
𝑘−1
Ö
𝑗=1
(1 −𝑜𝑗P(G𝑗,𝑢, 𝑣))
(2)
where c𝑘is the color of the 𝑘-th Gaussian. Note that in our approach,
we render the diffuse color with Eq. (2), but use deferred shading for
rendering specular color (Sec. 3.2.2). Similar to [Bagautdinov et al.
2021; Remelli et al. 2022], we parameterize rendering primitives (in
our case, 3D Gaussians) on a UV texture map of a tracked human
template mesh. Given 3D body and face keypoints at a frame, we
transform them according to the inverse transformations of the
body root and the face root, respectively, and denote them as K𝑏, K𝑓.
We then encode the keypoints into latent space and decode them
into Gaussian primitives {g𝑘}𝑀
𝑘=1. Formally, a encoder E and a view-
independent decoder D𝑐𝑖are defined as:
l𝑏, l𝑓= E(K𝑏, K𝑓; Θ𝑒)
(3)
{𝛿t𝑘,𝛿R𝑘, s𝑘,𝑜𝑘, z𝑐
𝑘, z𝑚
𝑘,𝛿n𝑘}𝑀
𝑘=1 = D𝑐𝑖(l𝑏, l𝑓; Θ𝑐𝑖)
(4)
ACM Trans. Graph., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: January 2025.


Relightable Full-Body Gaussian Codec Avatars
•
5
{𝜎𝑘, 𝐧𝑘, 𝐑𝑘, 𝐬𝑘, 𝐭𝑘, 𝑜𝑘, 𝒛𝑘
𝑐, 𝒛𝑘
𝑚}
ෝ𝝎𝑜
{𝑣𝑘}
Diffuse
Eq.(7)
𝛒𝑘
Splatting
Eq.(2)
ℒrec
Ground truth
𝒟𝑐𝑣
𝒟𝑐𝑖
𝑣𝑢𝑣
geometry
appearance
Viewing
direction
Lighting
Splatting
Eq.(2)
𝒄𝑢𝑣
specular
𝒄𝑢𝑣
diffuse
Specular
Eq.(12)
𝒄𝒖𝒗
𝜎𝑢𝑣
𝐧𝑢𝑣
Shadow (§3.3)
𝒍𝒃
Body
code
Face
code
𝒍𝒇
Fig. 2. Overview of our approach. Given a body latent code l𝑏and a face latent code l𝑓computed by a keypoint encoder and canonicalized viewing
directions ˆ𝜔𝑜as input, we decode the geometry parameters of 3D Gaussians {R𝑘, s𝑘, t𝑘,𝑜𝑘} (Sec. 3.1), and appearance parameters consisting of light transport
coefficients {z𝑐
𝑘, z𝑚
𝑘}, normals {n𝑘}, roughness {𝜎𝑘}, and specular visibility {𝑣𝑘} (Sec. 3.2). We integrate the light with diffuse light transport coefficients to
yield per-Gaussian diffuse color, while using deferred shading to compute specular color. The final color is modulated by a shadow map predicted by a shadow
network (Sec. 3.3).
where l𝑏and l𝑓are body and face latent codes predicted by the
encoder. The encoder E and the view-independent decoder D𝑐𝑖are
parameterized by Θ𝑒and Θ𝑐𝑖, respectively.
In contrast to the face modeling approach of [Saito et al. 2024], the
human body exhibits a much greater degree of articulation. We thus
propose to predict delta translation (𝛿t𝑘) and rotation (𝛿R𝑘) of each
Gaussian primitive in a local coordinate frame, which is defined
by the corresponding tangent-bitangent-normal (TBN) space of the
tracked mesh. Since each Gaussian is associated with a texel of the
texture map, we have a TBN transformation for each Gaussian prim-
itive. Let the TBN transformation for texel 𝑘be TBN𝑘= [¯t𝑘, ¯b𝑘, ¯n𝑘],
where column vectors ¯t𝑘, ¯b𝑘, ¯n𝑘represent the tangent, bitangent,
and normal at the texel 𝑘. Let the 3D world coordinate of the texel
𝑘be v𝑘. The translation and rotation of each Gaussian primitive in
the world coordinate frame is then:
t𝑘= v𝑘+ TBN𝑘· 𝛿t𝑘
(5)
R𝑘= TBN𝑘· 𝛿R𝑘
(6)
where · denotes the matrix-matrix/matrix-vector multiplication. We
transform the quaternion 𝛿R𝑘to a rotation matrix before applying
the TBN transformation, and then convert the resulting R𝑘back to
a quaternion.
3.2
Appearance
We follow the framework of [Saito et al. 2024] which models the
relightable appearance of a human face by combining diffuse light
transport based on spherical harmonics with a spherical-Gaussian-
based specular light transport. While [Saito et al. 2024] inversely
maps incident light to the local coordinate frame of head and com-
pute diffuse shading in that local coordinate frame, it is difficult to
apply the same technique in the full-body scenario. This is not only
because of the additional computational cost for mapping lights
into local coordinate frames of multiple body parts, but also because
accurately modeling inverse mappings for body joints is challenging.
It is thus preferable to rotate light transport functions to the world
coordinate, and compute diffuse shading in the world coordinate.
For specular light transport, we note that we cannot afford to
use the same number of Gaussian primitives for the face, compared
to face-specific models. This results in an under-representation of
specular highlights in the face region.
In the following, we describe how to learn the diffuse transport
coefficients in the local coordinate frame of each Gaussian primitive,
which can be subsequently transformed to the world coordinate
frame using the Gaussian rotation matrix. We then describe a de-
ferred shading scheme for specular light transport to improve the
rendering quality of specular highlights.
3.2.1
Zonal Harmonics for Diffuse Appearance. Following [Saito
et al. 2024], the diffuse color of the 𝑘-th Gaussian primitive is defined
as:
c𝑑
𝑘= 𝜌𝑘⊙
∫
S2 L(𝜔𝑖)d𝑘(𝜔𝑖)d𝜔𝑖= 𝜌𝑘⊙
(𝑛+1)2
∑︁
𝑖=1
L𝑖⊙d𝑖
𝑘
(7)
ACM Trans. Graph., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: January 2025.


6
•
Wang, S. et al
in which 𝜔𝑖∈S2 is the surface-to-light direction. L = {L𝑖}(𝑛+1)2
𝑖=1
and d𝑘= {d𝑖
𝑘}(𝑛+1)2
𝑖=1
are the incident light and light transport coef-
ficients represented as 𝑛-th order SH coefficients, respectively. Both
L𝑖and d𝑖
𝑘are in R3. 𝜌𝑘∈R3 is the albedo for primitive 𝑘. Albedos
are defined and optimized directly on the UV texture map. ⊙denotes
the element-wise multiplication.
As discussed previously, we would like to rotate SH coefficients to
the world coordinate instead of mapping incident light to the local
coordinate frames of body parts. An immediate challenge is that
rotating SH coefficients is prohibitively expensive, especially for
high-order SHs (we use 𝑛= 8 in our experiments). The amortized
complexity of rotating SH coefficients is 𝑂(𝑛3) for 𝑛th order SH. To
address this challenge, we take inspiration from [Sloan et al. 2005]
and use Zonal Harmonics (ZHs) to model the appearance of each
Gaussian primitive in its local coordinate frame. ZHs are a subset
of SHs that are circularly symmetric around a specified direction.
In the simplest case, {d𝑖
𝑘}(𝑛+1)2
𝑖=1
can be represented as a function
of arbitrary direction 𝜔∈S2, using a single set of ZH coefficients
{z𝑙
𝑘}𝑛
𝑙=0:
d𝑖
𝑘(𝜔) = z𝑙
𝑘𝑌𝑙𝑚(𝜔)
(8)
s.t.
∀𝑙= 0, · · · ,𝑛,
∀𝑚= −𝑙, · · · ,𝑙
𝑖= 𝑙2 + 𝑙+ 𝑚+ 1
where 𝑌𝑙𝑚is the SH basis function that maps a spherical direction
onto the SH basis specified by (𝑙,𝑚). In this case, we predict only a
single z𝑙
𝑘for all𝑚values given a fixed 𝑙. The ZH coefficients {z𝑙
𝑘}𝑛
𝑙=0
are agnostic to the orientation of the primitive, which essentially
represents the light transport properties of the primitive in a local
coordinate frame.
Though efficient in yielding rotated SH coefficients, the expres-
siveness of a single ZH is limited in that Eq. (8) can only represent
functions that are circularly symmetric around 𝜔. Thus in practice,
we predict three sets of colored ZH coefficients, together denoted
z𝑘∈R3×3𝑙for a texel 𝑘. d𝑘is represented as the sum of these
ZH basis functions evaluated at the tangent, bitangent, and normal
directions of the Gaussian primitive, respectively:
d𝑖
𝑘= z0𝑙
𝑘𝑌𝑙𝑚(ˆt𝑘) + z1𝑙
𝑘𝑌𝑙𝑚(ˆb𝑘) + z2𝑙
𝑘𝑌𝑙𝑚(ˆn𝑘)
(9)
s.t.
∀𝑙= 0, · · · ,𝑛,
∀𝑚= −𝑙, · · · ,𝑙
𝑖= 𝑙2 + 𝑙+ 𝑚+ 1
The tangent ˆt𝑘, bitangent ˆb𝑘, and normal ˆn𝑘directions are defined
as the first, second, and third columns of R𝑘(Eq. (6)), respectively.
We represent colored ZHs (z𝑐
𝑘) up to the 3rd order while using
monochromatic ZHs (z𝑚
𝑘) from the 4-th to 8-th order.
3.2.2
Specular Appearance. In this subsection, we describe how to
model the specular appearance of the Gaussian primitives. The gen-
eral framework is similar to [Saito et al. 2024] but with modifications
to adapt to full-body modeling. We associate the specular normal
vectors with the geometry of the Gaussian primitives, to obtain
high-quality specular normals, especially for modeling clothes. We
also employ deferred shading to better capture specular highlights
due to using a limited number of Gaussians compared to face-only
models.
Specular normal: The normal vector n𝑘is crucial for modeling
the specular appearance of the Gaussian primitive. We found that
associating the normal vector with the last column of the Gaussian
primitive’s rotation matrix (i.e. ˆn𝑘from Eq. (9)) achieves high-quality
results. Formally:
n𝑘= (ˆn𝑘+ 𝛿n𝑘)/∥ˆn𝑘+ 𝛿n𝑘∥2
(10)
where 𝛿n𝑘is the predicted specular normal offset for the 𝑘-th Gauss-
ian primitive.
Deferred shading for specular radiance transfer: As demon-
strated in previous works [Dihlmann et al. 2024; Ye et al. 2024],
deferred shading can also be applied to Gaussian splatting to im-
prove the fidelity of the rendered specular appearance. We employ a
similar technique to our specular radiance transfer function. We use
Eq. (2) to render specular normals, roughness, and specular visibility
in screen space, denoted as n𝑢𝑣, 𝜎𝑢𝑣, and 𝑣𝑢𝑣, respectively. Take the
specular normal for example:
¯n𝑢𝑣=
∑︁
𝑘=1
n𝑘𝑜𝑘P(G𝑘,𝑢, 𝑣)
𝑘−1
Ö
𝑗=1
(1 −𝑜𝑗P(G𝑗,𝑢, 𝑣))
(11)
The final screen space normal is defined as n𝑢𝑣= ¯n𝑢𝑣/∥¯n𝑢𝑣∥2. 𝜎𝑢𝑣,
and 𝑣𝑢𝑣are obtained similarly but without the normalization step.
Spherical Gaussians: We employ spherical Gaussians [Green et al.
2006; Wang et al. 2009] to model the specular appearance. Given
screen space parameters n𝑢𝑣, 𝜎𝑢𝑣, and 𝑣𝑢𝑣which we have described
in the previous section, we compute the final specular color for the
pixel (𝑢, 𝑣) in screen space as follows:
c𝑠(𝑢, 𝑣) = 𝑣𝑢𝑣
∫
S2 L(𝜔𝑖)𝐺𝑠(𝜔𝑖; q𝑢𝑣, 𝜎𝑢𝑣)d𝜔𝑖
(12)
where 𝐺𝑠is the spherical Gaussian distribution of the specular lobe
with mean q𝑢𝑣∈S2 and standard deviation 𝜎𝑢𝑣∈R+. Formally, the
lobe is defined as:
𝐺𝑠(p; q𝑢𝑣, 𝜎𝑢𝑣) =
1
√
2𝜋
2
3 𝜎𝑢𝑣
exp
 
−1
2
 arccos(p · q𝑢𝑣)
𝜎𝑢𝑣
2!
(13)
in practice, the mean q𝑢𝑣is the reflected vector of surface-to-camera
direction around the surface normal: q𝑢𝑣= 2(n𝑢𝑣· 𝜔𝑜)n𝑢𝑣−𝜔𝑜,
where 𝜔𝑜is the surface-to-camera direction for pixel (𝑢, 𝑣).
View-dependent appearance decoder: We decode specular pa-
rameters with a view-dependent decoder D𝑐𝑣:
{𝑣𝑘}𝑀
𝑘=1 = D𝑐𝑣(l𝑏, l𝑓, ˆ𝜔𝑜; Θ𝑐𝑣)
(14)
where ˆ𝜔𝑜are canonicalized viewing directions in the local coordi-
nate frames of the corresponding Gaussians. Similar to the albedo,
roughness 𝜎𝑘is defined explicitly on the UV texture map and opti-
mized with gradient descents.
3.3
Learning shadowing effects
Learning shadowing effects, especially for shadows caused by occlu-
sion between body parts, is crucial for realistic avatar appearance.
State-of-the-art methods rely on either mesh-based ray-tracing and
denoising [Chen et al. 2024c], or tracing rays in radiance fields [Li
et al. 2024b; Lin et al. 2024; Wang et al. 2024; Xu et al. 2024]. The for-
mer is limited by the reconstruction quality of semi-opaque surfaces
ACM Trans. Graph., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: January 2025.


Relightable Full-Body Gaussian Codec Avatars
•
7
and structures, such as skin, hairs, and thin clothes. The latter is
limited by computational efficiency, as explicitly tracing rays in ra-
diance fields is computationally expensive, and to estimate accurate
shadowing effects, one needs to carry out ray tracing for each gradi-
ent update. Fortunately, our learned radiance transfer model already
captures local shadows caused by intricate geometry such as cloth
wrinkles. Here we describe the shadow branch that is dedicated
to capturing non-local shadows caused by the occlusion between
body parts. We start by precomputing normalized irradiance for the
underlying coarse tracked mesh V = {v𝑘} as follows:
Irradiance(v𝑘) =
∫
S2 L(v𝑘,𝜔𝑖)Vis(v𝑘,𝜔𝑖)d𝜔𝑖
∫
S2 L(v𝑘,𝜔𝑖)d𝜔𝑖
(15)
where Vis(v𝑘,𝜔𝑖) is the visibility function that models whether the
light from direction 𝜔𝑖is visible at v𝑘. We approximate Eq. (15)
via Monte Carlo estimation in different scenarios such as multiple
point lights (training) and environment maps (testing). Details can
be found in Appendix A.
We apply a light-weight convolutional neural network [Bagaut-
dinov et al. 2021] in UV space to predict a shadow map value
shadow𝑘∈[0, 1], ∀𝑘∈{1, · · · , 𝑀} given a precomputed irradi-
ance UV map. Similar to specular normal, roughness, and specular
visibility, we render the shadow map in screen space as shadow(𝑢, 𝑣).
The final output color for pixel (𝑢, 𝑣) is:
C(𝑢, 𝑣) = (c𝑑(𝑢, 𝑣) + c𝑠(𝑢, 𝑣)) · shadow(𝑢, 𝑣)
(16)
where c𝑑(𝑢, 𝑣) and c𝑠(𝑢, 𝑣) are the diffuse and specular colors in
screen space, respectively.
3.4
Training Losses
Given multi-view training videos of the target person along with the
corresponding known illumination condition, we employ a standard
L1 loss and LPIPS loss to supervise the reconstruction of the target
person using the input RGB videos:
Lrec = LL1 + 𝜆LPIPSLLPIPS
(17)
where 𝜆LPIPS = 0.1. In addition to the reconstruction loss, we also
employ several regularization losses as follows:
Lreg =Lscale + 𝜆offsetLoffset + 𝜆maskLmask + 𝜆normalLnormal
+ 𝜆boundLbound + 𝜆normal_orientLnormal_orient
+ 𝜆alpha_sparsityLalpha_sparsity + 𝜆albedoLalbedo
+ 𝜆neg_colorLneg_color
(18)
We refer readers to Appendix B for a detailed definition of each loss
term.
We optimize all trainable network parameters Θ = {Θ𝑒, Θ𝑐𝑖, Θ𝑐𝑣}
and static parameters {𝜌𝑘, 𝜎𝑘} using Adam optimizer. We use a
learning rate of 10−3 for network parameters while 10−2 for static
parameters. Training runs for 300k iterations with a batch size of 4
on a single NVIDIA A100 GPU, taking approximately 2 days.
4
EXPERIMENTS
In this section, we qualitatively and quantitatively evaluate our
approach to building relightable full-body avatars. We first sum-
marize the dataset we captured for training and evaluation. Then
we introduce related baselines and evaluation metrics. Finally, we
present qualitative and quantitative results of our approach and the
baselines, demonstrating the superior quality of our approach on
the tasks of relighting and animating neural avatars.
4.1
Dataset
We captured five sequences using our multi-camera light stage, see
Fig. 6. We employ three subjects for qualitative and quantitative
evaluation against baselines, while the other two subjects are used to
demonstrate additional qualitative results. The light stage employs
1024 individually controllable light sources with known locations
and light intensities. The total number of training frames for each
captured sequence is about 5000-6000, with 512 cameras for each
frame. The resolution of the captured videos is 5328𝑥4608. We down-
sample the capture to quarter resolution for more efficient training.
The captured videos consist of fully-lit frames (all light sources are
on) and partially-lit frames (a random subset of 10-20 light sources
are on). We hold out 20% of the camera views for evaluation. We also
hold out 10% of the partially-lit frames from the training sequences
as well as partially-lit frames from unseen motion sequences for
evaluation.
4.2
Baselines and Evaluation Metrics
Baselines: Since there is no existing method that can directly run
on our dataset (hundreds of high-resolution cameras, with calibrated
and known light sources), we create a baseline that uses the learned
geometry from our method and a PBR appearance model that is
employed in most established full-body avatar methods, e.g. [Chen
et al. 2024c; Chen and Liu 2022; Li et al. 2024b; Lin et al. 2024;
Wang et al. 2024; Xu et al. 2024]. For ablations, we demonstrate
the effectiveness of the ZH diffuse appearance representation and
the importance of non-local shadow modeling. We also show that
associating Gaussian rotations with specular normals results in
more detailed normal estimations, while deferred shading helps to
capture detailed specular reflections such as eye glints.
Evaluation Tasks and Metrics: We quantitatively evaluate the
performance of our method as well as baselines on the task of
relighting using held-out poses from novel views.
We use standard PNSR/SSMI/LPIPS metrics for evaluation. We
also crop out the foreground human avatar before computing these
metrics to minimize the influence from the background.
4.3
Results and Discussion
We report the quantitative results in Table 1. Our learned radiance
transfer model significantly outperforms the PBR appearance model
in terms of all metrics. This is because the PBR appearance model
used in previous methods is designed mostly for opaque objects and
does not model translucent structures such as hairs, and subsurface
scattering effects for skins (Fig. 3). Our method also achieves the
best LPIPS scores compared to all ablation variants. Specifically,
we show a large performance drop when using SH instead of ZH,
which demonstrates the importance of the ZH diffuse coefficients
that capture appearance more faithfully for highly articulated body
parts such as hands and arms (Fig. 4). Here SH is not rotated as
ACM Trans. Graph., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: January 2025.


8
•
Wang, S. et al
Method
Training Motion
Unseen Motion
PSNR ↑SSIM ↑LPIPS ↓PSNR ↑SSIM ↑LPIPS ↓
PBR
28.35
0.7729
0.1993
26.83
0.7477
0.2166
SH
29.15
0.7958
0.1846
27.21
0.7679
0.2056
w.o. shadow
28.89
0.7991
0.1800
27.07
0.7707
0.2004
w.o. deferred
29.55
0.8047
0.1796
27.59
0.7755
0.2003
Mesh normal
29.43
0.8036
0.1785
27.53
0.7747
0.1993
Ours
29.48
0.8046
0.1781
27.57
0.7756
0.1989
Table 1. Quantitative comparison to baselines. The top two approaches
are highlighted in red and orange, respectively.
discussed int Sec. 3.2.1 We also note that the SH representations
need 3 × (3 + 1)2 + (8 + 1)2 −(3 + 1)2 = 113 parameters to represent
a texel, whereas our ZH representation only needs 3 × 3 × (3 +
1) + 3 × 5 = 51 parameters. Removing the shadow network also
leads to a noticeable decrease in all metrics, indicating that a naive
pose-dependent radiance transfer model is not sufficient to capture
non-local shadow effects (Fig. 5). Replacing Gaussian normals with
mesh normals also results in less detailed normals (Fig. 8), and a
slight drop in all metrics.
We note that the w.o. deferred baseline achieves slightly better
PSNR/SSIM compared to the full model. This could be attributed to
two reasons: 1) w.o. deferred produces an overall smoother appear-
ance due to alpha blending of multiple specular color predictions
for a single pixel; metrics such as PSNR/SSIM often favor this kind
of smoothed appearance, while LPIPS reflects more on the overall
perceptual quality of the rendering. This is demonstrated in Fig. 7
where w.o. deferred misses high-frequency reflections on the nose
and eyes. 2) Our current geometry formulation for deferred shading
is error-prone due to the noisy per-pixel depth estimation from
Gaussian splatting. Misalignment in depth could result in errors in
surface-to-light vectors, and subsequently propagating to shading
results. The vanilla 3DGS is known for its under-representation of
precise scene geometry. Several recent works try to improve the ge-
ometry reconstruction of 3DGS [Chen et al. 2024a; Huang et al. 2024;
Yu et al. 2024]. Incorporating these improvements in our geometry
representation would be an interesting future work.
5
CONCLUSION
We have introduced a novel method for full-body, relightable, and
drivable human avatar reconstruction from light-stage data. Our
experiments show that perceptually realistic relightable full-body
avatars can be achieved by combining a zonal-harmonic-based,
orientation-dependent diffuse radiance transfer, and a deferred-
shading-based specular radiance transfer, all learned from image
observations only. We have also demonstrated that non-local shad-
ows caused by body articulation can be captured by irradiance-
conditioned shadow networks. Overall, our approach achieves a
significant improvement in quality for full-body relightable human
avatar modeling, compared to existing PBR-based models.
Limitations: Our method has several limitations. First, the cloth
dynamics are based purely on the learned latent space, which may
not be physically plausible. In such a case, the method may fail
in out-of-distribution scenarios, e.g. when hands are touching the
cloth or when extreme body poses are present. A more physically
plausible clothing layer [Peng et al. 2024; Rong et al. 2024; Xiang
et al. 2022, 2023; Zheng et al. 2024] could be potentially integrated
to resolve this issue. Second, our method is still suboptimal in cap-
turing detailed appearances of eyes, faces, and hands compared to
specialized methods [Chen et al. 2024b; Iwase et al. 2023; Li et al.
2022a; Saito et al. 2024], as the model capacity assigned to these
regions is limited. This could be potentially solved by dynamically
assigning UV space capacity to different body parts during learning.
Lastly, our method has limited scalability as it requires a multi-
camera setup with known light sources, a natural future direction is
to extend the method to universal setups similar to related face [Li
et al. 2024a] and hand [Chen et al. 2024b] models.
REFERENCES
Timur M. Bagautdinov, Chenglei Wu, Tomas Simon, Fabián Prada, Takaaki Shiratori,
Shih-En Wei, Weipeng Xu, Yaser Sheikh, and Jason M. Saragih. 2021. Driving-signal
aware full-body avatars. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG) 40 (2021), 1 – 17.
Sai Bi, Stephen Lombardi, Shunsuke Saito, Tomas Simon, Shih-En Wei, Kevyn McPhail,
Ravi Ramamoorthi, Yaser Sheikh, and Jason M. Saragih. 2021. Deep relightable
appearance models for animatable faces. Transactions on Graphics, (Proc. SIGGRAPH)
40, 4 (2021), 89:1–89:15.
Danpeng Chen, Hai Li, Weicai Ye, Yifan Wang, Weijian Xie, Shangjin Zhai, Nan Wang,
Haomin Liu, Hujun Bao, and Guofeng Zhang. 2024a. PGSR: Planar-based Gauss-
ian Splatting for Efficient and High-Fidelity Surface Reconstruction. arXiv.org
2406.06521 (2024).
Yushuo Chen, Zerong Zheng, Zhe Li, Chao Xu, and Yebin Liu. 2024c. MeshAvatar: Learn-
ing High-quality Triangular Human Avatars from Multi-view Videos. In European
Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV).
Zhaoxi Chen, Fangzhou Hong, Haiyi Mei, Guangcong Wang, Lei Yang, and Ziwei Liu.
2023. PrimDiffusion: Volumetric Primitives Diffusion for 3D Human Generation. In
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS).
Zhaoxi Chen and Ziwei Liu. 2022. Relighting4D: Neural Relightable Human from
Videos. In European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV).
Zhaoxi Chen, Gyeongsik Moon, Kaiwen Guo, Chen Cao, Stanislav Pidhorskyi, Tomas
Simon, Rohan Joshi, Yuan Dong, Yichen Xu, Bernardo Pires, He Wen, Lucas Evans,
Bo Peng, Julia Buffalini, Autumn Trimble, Kevyn McPhail, Melissa Schoeller, Shoou-I
Yu, Javier Romero, Michael Zollhöfer, Yaser Sheikh, Ziwei Liu, and Shunsuke Saito.
2024b. URHand: Universal Relightable Hands. In Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition (CVPR).
Alvaro Collet, Ming Chuang, Pat Sweeney, Don Gillett, Dennis Evseev, David Calabrese,
Hugues Hoppe, Adam Kirk, and Steve Sullivan. 2015. High-quality streamable
free-viewpoint video. Transactions on Graphics, (Proc. SIGGRAPH) 34, 4 (2015),
69:1–69:13.
Michael Deering, Stephanie Winner, Bic Schediwy, Chris Duffy, and Neil Hunt. 1988. The
triangle processor and normal vector shader: a VLSI system for high performance
graphics. ACM SIGGRAPH Computer Graphics 22, 4 (1988), 21–30.
Jan-Niklas Dihlmann, Arjun Majumdar, Andreas Engelhardt, Raphael Braun, and Hen-
drik P.A. Lensch. 2024. Subsurface Scattering for Gaussian Splatting. In Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS).
Duan Gao, Guojun Chen, Yue Dong, Pieter Peers, Kun Xu, and Xin Tong. 2020. Deferred
neural lighting: free-viewpoint relighting from unstructured photographs. ACM
Transactions on Graphics (TOG) 39, 6 (2020), 1–15.
Paul Green, Jan Kautz, Wojciech Matusik, and Frédo Durand. 2006. View-dependent
precomputed light transport using nonlinear gaussian function approximations. In
Proceedings of the 2006 symposium on Interactive 3D graphics and games. 7–14.
Artur Grigorev, Artem Sevastopolsky, Alexander Vakhitov, and Victor Lempitsky. 2019.
Coordinate-based texture inpainting for pose-guided human image generation. In
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition.
12135–12144.
Kaiwen Guo, Peter Lincoln, Philip L. Davidson, Jay Busch, Xueming Yu, Matt Whalen,
Geoff Harvey, Sergio Orts-Escolano, Rohit Pandey, Jason Dourgarian, Danhang
Tang, Anastasia Tkach, Adarsh Kowdle, Emily Cooper, Mingsong Dou, Sean Ryan
Fanello, Graham Fyffe, Christoph Rhemann, Jonathan Taylor, Paul E. Debevec, and
Shahram Izadi. 2019. The relightables: volumetric performance capture of humans
with realistic relighting. Transactions on Graphics, (Proc. SIGGRAPH) 38, 6 (2019),
217:1–217:19.
ACM Trans. Graph., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: January 2025.


Relightable Full-Body Gaussian Codec Avatars
•
9
Marc Habermann, Lingjie Liu, Weipeng Xu, Michael Zollhoefer, Gerard Pons-Moll, and
Christian Theobalt. 2021. Real-time deep dynamic characters. ACM Transactions on
Graphics (ToG) 40, 4 (2021), 1–16.
Mingming He, Pascal Clausen, Ahmet Levent Taşel, Li Ma, Oliver Pilarski, Wenqi
Xian, Laszlo Rikker, Xueming Yu, Ryan Burgert, Ning Yu, and Paul Debevec. 2024.
DifFRelight: Diffusion-Based Facial Performance Relighting. In ACM SIGGRAPH
Asia 2024 Conference Papers.
Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. 2020. Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic
Models. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS).
Shoukang Hu and Ziwei Liu. 2024. Gauhuman: Articulated gaussian splatting from
monocular human videos. In Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
(CVPR).
Binbin Huang, Zehao Yu, Anpei Chen, Andreas Geiger, and Shenghua Gao. 2024. 2D
Gaussian Splatting for Geometrically Accurate Radiance Fields. In SIGGRAPH 2024
Conference Papers. Association for Computing Machinery.
Shun Iwase, Saito Saito, Tomas Simon, Stephen Lombardi, Bagautdinov Timur, Ro-
han Joshi, Fabian Prada, Takaaki Shiratori, Yaser Sheikh, and Jason Saragih. 2023.
RelightableHands: Efficient Neural Relighting of Articulated Hand Models. In Con-
ference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR).
Chaonan Ji, Tao Yu, Kaiwen Guo, Jingxin Liu, and Yebin Liu. 2022. Geometry-aware
single-image full-body human relighting. In European Conference on Computer Vision.
Springer, 388–405.
Wei Jiang, Kwang Moo Yi, Golnoosh Samei, Oncel Tuzel, and Anurag Ranjan. 2022.
NeuMan: Neural Human Radiance Field from a Single Video. In European Conference
on Computer Vision (ECCV).
Yoshihiro Kanamori and Yuki Endo. 2018. Relighting humans: occlusion-aware inverse
rendering for full-body human images. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG) 37, 6
(2018), 1–11.
Bernhard Kerbl, Georgios Kopanas, Thomas Leimkuehler, and George Drettakis. 2023.
3D Gaussian Splatting for Real-Time Radiance Field Rendering. ACM Transactions
on Graphics (TOG) 42 (2023), 1 – 14.
https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:
259267917
Hoon Kim, Minje Jang, Wonjun Yoon, Jisoo Lee, Donghyun Na, and Sanghyun Woo.
2024. SwitchLight: Co-design of Physics-driven Architecture and Pre-training
Framework for Human Portrait Relighting. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.18848 (2024).
Gengyan Li, Abhimitra Meka, Franziska Mueller, Marcel C Buehler, Otmar Hilliges, and
Thabo Beeler. 2022a. EyeNeRF: a hybrid representation for photorealistic synthesis,
animation and relighting of human eyes. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG) 41, 4
(2022), 1–16.
Junxuan Li, Chen Cao, Gabriel Schwartz, Rawal Khirodkar, Christian Richardt, Tomas
Simon, Yaser Sheikh, and Shunsuke Saito. 2024a. URAvatar: Universal Relightable
Gaussian Codec Avatars. In ACM SIGGRAPH 2024 Conference Papers.
Ruilong Li, Julian Tanke, Minh Vo, Michael Zollhofer, Jurgen Gall, Angjoo Kanazawa,
and Christoph Lassner. 2022b. TAVA: Template-free animatable volumetric actors.
In European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV).
Zhe Li, Yipengjing Sun, Zerong Zheng, Lizhen Wang, Shengping Zhang, and Yebin
Liu. 2024b. Animatable and Relightable Gaussians for High-fidelity Human Avatar
Modeling. arXiv.org 2311.16096v4 (2024).
Zhe Li, Zerong Zheng, Lizhen Wang, and Yebin Liu. 2024c. Animatable gaussians:
Learning pose-dependent gaussian maps for high-fidelity human avatar modeling.
In Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR).
Wenbin Lin, Chengwei Zheng, Jun-Hai Yong, and Feng Xu. 2024. Relightable and
Animatable Neural Avatars from Videos. In Conference on Artificial Intelligence
(AAAI).
Lingjie Liu, Marc Habermann, Viktor Rudnev, Kripasindhu Sarkar, Jiatao Gu, and
Christian Theobalt. 2021. Neural Actor: Neural Free-view Synthesis of Human
Actors with Pose Control. Transactions on Graphics, (Proc. SIGGRAPH) 40, 6 (2021),
219:1–219:16.
Stephen Lombardi, Tomas Simon, Gabriel Schwartz, Michael Zollhoefer, Yaser Sheikh,
and Jason Saragih. 2021. Mixture of volumetric primitives for efficient neural
rendering. ACM Transactions on Graphics (ToG) 40, 4 (2021), 1–13.
Matthew Loper, Naureen Mahmood, Javier Romero, Gerard Pons-Moll, and Michael J.
Black. 2015. SMPL: A Skinned Multi-Person Linear Model. Seminal Graphics Papers:
Pushing the Boundaries, Volume 2 (2015). https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:
5328073
Jonathon Luiten, Georgios Kopanas, Bastian Leibe, and Deva Ramanan. 2023. Dy-
namic 3D Gaussians: Tracking by Persistent Dynamic View Synthesis.
ArXiv
abs/2308.09713 (2023). https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:261030923
Linjie Lyu, Ayush Tewari, Thomas Leimkuehler, Marc Habermann, and Christian
Theobalt. 2022. Neural Radiance Transfer Fields for Relightable Novel-view Synthe-
sis with Global Illumination. In European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV).
Ben Mildenhall, Pratul P Srinivasan, Matthew Tancik, Jonathan T Barron, Ravi Ra-
mamoorthi, and Ren Ng. 2021. Nerf: Representing scenes as neural radiance fields
for view synthesis. Commun. ACM 65, 1 (2021), 99–106.
Ren Ng, Ravi Ramamoorthi, and Pat Hanrahan. 2003. All-frequency shadows using non-
linear wavelet lighting approximation. Transactions on Graphics, (Proc. SIGGRAPH)
22, 3 (2003), 376–381.
Rohit Pandey, Sergio Orts Escolano, Chloe Legendre, Christian Haene, Sofien Bouaziz,
Christoph Rhemann, Paul Debevec, and Sean Fanello. 2021. Total relighting: learning
to relight portraits for background replacement. ACM Transactions on Graphics
(TOG) 40, 4 (2021), 1–21.
Haokai Pang, Heming Zhu, Adam Kortylewski, Christian Theobalt, and Marc Haber-
mann. 2024. Ash: Animatable gaussian splats for efficient and photoreal human
rendering. In Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR).
Bo Peng, Yunfan Tao, Haoyu Zhan, Yudong Guo, and Juyong Zhang. 2024. PICA:
Physics-Integrated Clothed Avatar. arXiv.org 2407.05324 (2024).
Sida Peng, Yuanqing Zhang, Yinghao Xu, Qianqian Wang, Qing Shuai, Hujun Bao, and
Xiaowei Zhou. 2021. Neural Body: Implicit Neural Representations with Structured
Latent Codes for Novel View Synthesis of Dynamic Humans. In Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR).
Matt Pharr, Wenzel Jakob, and Greg Humphreys. 2023. Physically Based Rendering:
From Theory to Implementation (4th ed.). The MIT Press.
Fabián Prada, Misha Kazhdan, Ming Chuang, Alvaro Collet, and Hugues Hoppe. 2017.
Spatiotemporal atlas parameterization for evolving meshes. Transactions on Graphics,
(Proc. SIGGRAPH) 36, 4 (2017), 58:1–58:12.
Sergey Prokudin, Qianli Ma, Maxime Raafat, Julien Valentin, and Siyu Tang. 2023.
Dynamic Point Fields. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.02626 (2023).
Zhiyin Qian, Shaofei Wang, Marko Mihajlovic, Andreas Geiger, and Siyu Tang. 2024.
3dgs-avatar: Animatable avatars via deformable 3d gaussian splatting. In Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR).
Gilles Rainer, Adrien Bousseau, Tobias Ritschel, and George Drettakis. 2022. Neural
precomputed radiance transfer. Computer Graphics Forum 41, 2 (2022), 365–378.
Edoardo Remelli, Timur Bagautdinov, Shunsuke Saito, Chenglei Wu, Tomas Simon,
Shih-En Wei, Kaiwen Guo, Zhe Cao, Fabian Prada, Jason Saragih, et al. 2022. Drivable
volumetric avatars using texel-aligned features. In ACM SIGGRAPH 2022 Conference
Proceedings.
Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer.
2022. High-Resolution Image Synthesis With Latent Diffusion Models. In Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR).
Boxiang Rong, Artur Grigorev, Wenbo Wang, Michael J. Black, Bernhard Thomaszewski,
Christina Tsalicoglou, and Otmar Hilliges. 2024. Gaussian Garments: Reconstructing
Simulation-Ready Clothing with Photorealistic Appearance from Multi-View Video.
arXiv.org 2409.08189 (2024).
Shunsuke Saito, Gabriel Schwartz, Tomas Simon, Junxuan Li, and Giljoo Nam. 2024.
Relightable Gaussian Codec Avatars. In Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition (CVPR).
Peter-Pike Sloan, Jan Kautz, and John Snyder. 2002. Precomputed Radiance Transfer
for Real-Time Rendering in Dynamic, Low-Frequency LightingEvironments. ACM
Trans. Graph. 21, 3 (jul 2002), 527–536.
Peter-Pike Sloan, Ben Luna, and John Snyder. 2005. Local, deformable precomputed
radiance transfer. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG) 24, 3 (2005), 1216–1224.
Jiaming Song, Chenlin Meng, and Stefano Ermon. 2021a. Denoising Diffusion Implicit
Models. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR).
Yang Song, Jascha Sohl-Dickstein, Diederik P Kingma, Abhishek Kumar, Stefano Ermon,
and Ben Poole. 2021b. Score-Based Generative Modeling through Stochastic Differ-
ential Equations. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR).
Jonathan Starck and Adrian Hilton. 2007. Surface Capture for Performance-Based
Animation. IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications (CGA) 27, 3 (2007), 21–31.
Shih-Yang Su, Timur Bagautdinov, and Helge Rhodin. 2022. DANBO: Disentangled
Articulated Neural Body Representations via Graph Neural Networks. In European
Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV).
Shih-Yang Su, Timur M. Bagautdinov, and Helge Rhodin. 2023. NPC: Neural Point
Characters from Video. ArXiv abs/2304.02013 (2023). https://api.semanticscholar.
org/CorpusID:257921288
Shih-Yang Su, Frank Yu, Michael Zollhoefer, and Helge Rhodin. 2021. A-NeRF: Articu-
lated Neural Radiance Fields for Learning Human Shape, Appearance, and Pose. In
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS).
Tiancheng Sun, Jonathan T Barron, Yun-Ta Tsai, Zexiang Xu, Xueming Yu, Graham
Fyffe, Christoph Rhemann, Jay Busch, Paul Debevec, and Ravi Ramamoorthi. 2019.
Single image portrait relighting. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG) 38, 4 (2019),
1–12.
Justus Thies, Michael Zollhöfer, and Matthias Nießner. 2019. Deferred neural rendering:
Image synthesis using neural textures. Acm Transactions on Graphics (TOG) 38, 4
(2019), 1–12.
Yu-Ting Tsai and Zen-Chung Shih. 2006. All-frequency precomputed radiance transfer
using spherical radial basis functions and clustered tensor approximation. Transac-
tions on Graphics, (Proc. SIGGRAPH) 25, 3 (2006), 967–976.
Jiaping Wang, Peiran Ren, Minmin Gong, John Snyder, and Baining Guo. 2009. All-
frequency rendering of dynamic, spatially-varying reflectance. In ACM SIGGRAPH
Asia 2009 papers. 1–10.
Shaofei Wang, Božidar Antić, Andreas Geiger, and Siyu Tang. 2024. IntrinsicAvatar:
Physically Based Inverse Rendering of Dynamic Humans from Monocular Videos
ACM Trans. Graph., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: January 2025.


10
•
Wang, S. et al
via Explicit Ray Tracing. In Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
(CVPR).
Shaofei Wang, Katja Schwarz, Andreas Geiger, and Siyu Tang. 2022. ARAH: Animatable
Volume Rendering of Articulated Human SDFs. In European Conference on Computer
Vision (ECCV).
Chung-Yi Weng, Brian Curless, Pratul P. Srinivasan, Jonathan T. Barron, and Ira
Kemelmacher-Shlizerman. 2022. HumanNeRF: Free-Viewpoint Rendering of Mov-
ing People From Monocular Video. In Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition (CVPR).
Donglai Xiang, Timur M. Bagautdinov, Tuur Stuyck, Fabián Prada, Javier Romero,
Weipeng Xu, Shunsuke Saito, Jingfan Guo, Breannan Smith, Takaaki Shiratori,
Yaser Sheikh, Jessica K. Hodgins, and Chenglei Wu. 2022. Dressing Avatars. ACM
Transactions on Graphics (TOG) 41 (2022), 1 – 15. https://api.semanticscholar.org/
CorpusID:250144637
Donglai Xiang, Fabián Prada, Zhe Cao, Kaiwen Guo, Chenglei Wu, Jessica K. Hodgins,
and Timur M. Bagautdinov. 2023. Drivable Avatar Clothing: Faithful Full-Body
Telepresence with Dynamic Clothing Driven by Sparse RGB-D Input. In SIGGRAPH
Asia 2023 Conference Papers.
Zhen Xu, Sida Peng, Chen Geng, Linzhan Mou, Zihan Yan, Jiaming Sun, Hujun Bao, and
Xiaowei Zhou. 2024. Relightable and Animatable Neural Avatar from Sparse-View
Video. In Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR).
Zilin Xu, Zheng Zeng, Lifan Wu, Lu Wang, and Ling-Qi Yan. 2022. Lightweight Neural
Basis Functions for All-Frequency Shading. In SIGGRAPH Asia 2022 Conference
Papers.
Haotian Yang, Mingwu Zheng, Wanquan Feng, Haibin Huang, Yu-Kun Lai, Pengfei
Wan, Zhongyuan Wang, and Chongyang Ma. 2023. Towards Practical Capture of
High-Fidelity Relightable Avatars. In SIGGRAPH Asia 2023 Conference Proceedings.
Keyang Ye, Qiming Hou, and Kun Zhou. 2024. 3D Gaussian Splatting with Deferred
Reflection. In Transactions on Graphics, (Proc. SIGGRAPH).
Zehao Yu, Torsten Sattler, and Andreas Geiger. 2024. Gaussian Opacity Fields: Efficient
Adaptive Surface Reconstruction in Unbounded Scenes. Transactions on Graphics,
(Proc. SIGGRAPH) 43, 6, Article 271 (2024), 13 pages.
Xiuming Zhang, Sean Ryan Fanello, Yun-Ta Tsai, Tiancheng Sun, Tianfan Xue, Rohit
Pandey, Sergio Orts-Escolano, Philip L. Davidson, Christoph Rhemann, Paul E.
Debevec, Jonathan T. Barron, Ravi Ramamoorthi, and William T. Freeman. 2021.
Neural Light Transport for Relighting and View Synthesis. Transactions on Graphics,
(Proc. SIGGRAPH) 40, 1 (2021), 1–17.
Yufeng Zheng, Wang Yifan, Gordon Wetzstein, Michael J Black, and Otmar Hilliges. 2023.
Pointavatar: Deformable point-based head avatars from videos. In Proceedings of
the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. 21057–21067.
Yang Zheng, Qingqing Zhao, Guandao Yang, Wang Yifan, Donglai Xiang, Florian
Dubost, Dmitry Lagun, Thabo Beeler, Federico Tombari, Leonidas Guibas, and
Gordon Wetzstein. 2024. PhysAvatar: Learning the Physics of Dressed 3D Avatars
from Visual Observations. In European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV).
Wojciech Zielonka, Timur Bagautdinov, Shunsuke Saito, Michael Zollhöfer, Justus
Thies, and Javier Romero. 2023. Drivable 3d gaussian avatars. arXiv.org 2311.08581
(2023).
Matthias Zwicker, Hanspeter Pfister, Jeroen Van Baar, and Markus Gross. 2002. EWA
splatting. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics 8, 3 (2002),
223–238.
ACM Trans. Graph., Vol. 1, No. 1, Article . Publication date: January 2025.
