Title: MonoHair: High-Fidelity Hair Modeling from a Monocular Video

MonoHair: High-Fidelity Hair Modeling from a Monocular Video
Keyu Wu1
Lingchen Yang2
Zhiyi Kuang1
Yao Feng2,4
Xutao Han1
Yuefan Shen1
Hongbo Fu3,5
Kun Zhou1
Youyi Zheng1†
1 Zhejiang University
2 ETH Zurich
3 City University of Hong Kong
4 Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems
5 Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
a) Input video
b) Hair geometry
c) Hair strands
Figure 1. We propose a generic framework for 3D hair modeling from monocular videos (a). It commences with a coarse raw geometry
produced by volumetric representations. Subsequently, we extract the exterior geometry of the hair from the raw geometry and combine it
with an inferred interior structure to obtain the complete 3D hair geometry (b). Finally, we recover the corresponding 3D hair model at the
strand level. Our method can reconstruct diverse hairstyles and achieve high-fidelity hair modeling results (c).
Abstract
Undoubtedly, high-fidelity 3D hair is crucial for achiev-
ing realism, artistic expression, and immersion in computer
graphics. While existing 3D hair modeling methods have
achieved impressive performance, the challenge of achiev-
ing high-quality hair reconstruction persists: they either re-
quire strict capture conditions, making practical applica-
tions difficult, or heavily rely on learned prior data, ob-
scuring fine-grained details in images. To address these
challenges, we propose MonoHair,a generic framework to
achieve high-fidelity hair reconstruction from a monocu-
lar video, without specific requirements for environments.
Our approach bifurcates the hair modeling process into two
main stages: precise exterior reconstruction and interior
structure inference.
The exterior is meticulously crafted
using our Patch-based Multi-View Optimization (PMVO).
This method strategically collects and integrates hair in-
formation from multiple views, independent of prior data,
to produce a high-fidelity exterior 3D line map. This map
†Corresponding author: Youyi Zheng.
not only captures intricate details but also facilitates the
inference of the hair’s inner structure.
For the interior,
we employ a data-driven, multi-view 3D hair reconstruc-
tion method. This method utilizes 2D structural renderings
derived from the reconstructed exterior, mirroring the syn-
thetic 2D inputs used during training. This alignment ef-
fectively bridges the domain gap between our training data
and real-world data, thereby enhancing the accuracy and
reliability of our interior structure inference.
Lastly, we
generate a strand model and resolve the directional am-
biguity by our hair growth algorithm.
Our experiments
demonstrate that our method exhibits robustness across di-
verse hairstyles and achieves state-of-the-art performance.
For more results, please refer to our project page https:
//keyuwu-cs.github.io/MonoHair/
1. Introduction
Hair is a key feature in digital humans, and a detailed
3D hair model will undoubtedly enhance their realism
[3, 8, 11, 14, 17]. However, hair modeling is an intricate
endeavor, fraught with challenges at every turn. The high
1
arXiv:2403.18356v1  [cs.CV]  27 Mar 2024


Initialization
Employ Instant-NGP
 & render a depth map 
for each view
PMVO
Filter out the noise of 
raw & optimize the 
3D direction for 
each 3D point
DeepMVSHair*
Infer an inner 
structure
Render an undirectional
 strand map & a depth 
map with 16 fixed views
Monocular video
preprocessing
Input
Hair Growing
Generate strands &
connect to scalp &
remove ambiguity
Depth map
Undirectional strand maps
Rendered depth maps
Output
Strand model
out
raw
in
PMVO
(Sec. 3.1)
DeepMVSHair*
 (Sec. 3.2)
Hair Growing
(Sec. 3.3)
Instant-
NGP
Figure 2. An overview of our 3D hair reconstruction pipeline.
complexity stems from the unique geometry of individual
strands twisting and turning in myriad ways.
In computer graphics, 3D hair is commonly modeled as
3D strands, facilitating rendering and simulation processes.
Although accurate strand-based hair modeling can be real-
ized using a light stage [22], it relies on dense synchronized
cameras. Besides, the reconstructed hair is incomplete since
only the hair’s exterior is captured neglecting its inner struc-
ture. To address these issues, several multi-view techniques
[13, 43] infer the inner structure based on an existing dataset
[10] while streamlining the experimental setup, for instance,
by using sparse calibrated cameras. However, this sparsity
in turn compromises the hair reconstruction quality. Re-
cently, [30] utilizes dense views extracted from a casually-
filmed video, achieving better quality and user-friendliness.
However, they rely heavily on the data prior and tend to
over-smooth the reconstruction results for certain specific
hairstyles. This issue is particularly noticeable in hairstyles
not well represented in the dataset, such as curly hair types.
Similar issues exist with the data-prior-based multi-view
methods. First, data priors, built by learning 3D hair gen-
erators with synthetic data, face diminished effectiveness
when applied to real data, mainly due to the significant do-
main gap between the synthetic training data and real-world
testing data. Second, the significant reliance on data pri-
ors tends to overshadow the rich information contained in
the original images. This neglect results in the prior over-
dominance, preventing these methods from modeling fine-
grained curly hair geometry, typically absent in the cur-
rent dataset[13, 30, 42, 43]. While such priors are essen-
tial for inferring plausible interior hair structures not readily
discernible from input data, we believe that the hairstyle’s
outer layer can be modeled directly and used to enhance and
refine the deduced interior structure.
As shown in Fig. 1, to address these concerns, we
propose a generic solution for reconstructing hair from a
monocular video.
Our approach begins by initializing a
coarse geometry through learning a Neural Radiance Field
(NeRF), followed by sampling around the coarse geometry
to generate a dense raw point cloud capable of represent-
ing diverse and complex hairstyles. To refine this raw point
cloud, we introduce PMVO, which leverages the rich infor-
mation contained in the input video frames to reconstruct a
high-quality hair exterior. This approach significantly alle-
viates the issue of prior over-dominance by focusing on the
hair’s exterior details. Lastly, to infer the missing inner hair
structure, we adopt a data-driven, multi-view hair method,
which takes 2D hair information as input. However, instead
of applying Gabor filter on the images to get the input, we
directly utilize 2D structural renderings derived from the re-
constructed exterior, which mirrors the synthetic 2D inputs
used during training. This alignment effectively bridges the
domain gap between our training data and real-world test-
ing data, thereby enhancing the accuracy and reliability of
our interior structure inference.
In summary, the main contributions of our work include:
• We propose a lightweight and generic framework for 3D
hair reconstruction from a monocular video. This frame-
work can robustly reconstruct diverse hairstyles, includ-
ing curly hair, and outperforms state-of-the-art monocular
video based hair reconstruction method in reconstruction
quality. It also offers a speed improvement of more than
tenfold.
• We present a novel process for extracting high-quality ex-
terior hair structures from noisy coarse geometries. This
is achieved through our innovative patch-based multiview
optimization, incorporating two novel cost functions: ray
regularization and patch-wise angular loss.
• We introduce an undirectional strand map, generated by
rendering the high-quality hair exterior, to bridge the gap
between synthetic and real-world data. This enhances the
reliability of interior hair structure inference.
2. Related work
Implicit Representations in 3D Hair Modeling.
Re-
cently, implicit representations such as NeRF [19, 21] and
2


implicit surfaces [32, 40] have emerged and gained exten-
sive use in novel view synthesis [1, 2, 19, 37] and general
scene reconstruction [7, 23, 33]. Their primary advantages
are high-quality results without meticulous camera calibra-
tion, and their flexibility for modeling various structures,
including hair. For instance, studies like [6, 26, 34–36]
employ volumetric representations to implicitly capture hair
from multi-view images or monocular videos. However, the
hair models generated by these methods fall short of meet-
ing the standards for high-quality 3D strand-based hair re-
construction. Despite this limitation, such representations
are valuable for providing initial coarse geometry.
Optimization Based Hair Reconstruction.
In the early
stages of hair reconstruction research, strand-based repre-
sentations were the primary focus, beginning with the pi-
oneering work by Paris et al. [24]. This approach set the
stage for numerous optimization-based hair reconstruction
methods. For instance, Luo et al. [16, 17] optimized a hair
mesh to incorporate fine-grained details using hair orien-
tations as constraints. Similarly, other studies [9, 18] em-
ployed Multi-View Stereo (MVS) techniques to generate
point clouds, optimizing shape primitives like strands and
ribbons to create complete hair models. Building upon these
methods, Nam et al. [22] introduced a line-based Patch-
Match MVS approach, capable of reconstructing high-
precision hair segments using a dense capture setup with
synchronized cameras. However, their method requires ex-
tensive multi-view calibrations and specific lighting condi-
tions, posing practical challenges for average users. More-
over, the reconstructed hair models lack interior structures,
thus significantly limiting their applicability.
Hair Reconstruction with Data Prior.
Since the USC-
HairSalon dataset [10] was released, using data priors for
3D hair reconstruction has gained widespread popularity.
Studies like [4, 43] have developed data-driven methods
that select and modify hairstyles from a database to match
them with the geometry seen in images. Further, research
illustrated in [27, 38, 39, 42, 44, 45] has shown how single
images can be input into neural networks trained with syn-
thetic data to create strand-based hair models. These deep
learning methods also work well with a few images from
different views, as shown in [13]. However, they struggle to
accurately reconstruct hairstyles not present in the database.
Additionally, their effectiveness is reduced when applied to
real data, primarily due to the significant domain gap be-
tween synthetic training data and real-world testing data.
Recently, [30] introduced a novel method that improves
hair strand reconstruction by integrating various techniques.
This method excels in mitigating issues associated with us-
ing synthetic data and produces impressive results. How-
ever, it heavily relies on data priors and is less effective in
reconstructing curly hair. Please refer to Sec. 4.1 for the
discussion.
3. Method
Fig. 2 shows the pipeline of MonoHair. Starting with a set
of images {I}, uniformly sampled from a captured monoc-
ular video, we employ NeRF [1, 20, 21] for scene recon-
struction. This yields a raw point cloud, Praw, which repre-
sents the hair region, albeit in a noisy manner. Given Praw,
we aim to reconstruct an accurate exterior layer Pout and
infer a plausible interior structure Pin. Based on these two
components, we then generate hair strands.
Our PMVO (denoted as Ψ) steps in to carve out a clear
hair exterior structure. By leveraging the information from
images {I}, it refines Praw and associates each point around
the hair’s boundary with a 3D hair-growing direction. This
process results in a 3D line map, Pout = Ψ(Praw, I), where
each 3D line can be represented by its 3D position p and 3D
direction d: Lp = {p, d} (Sec. 3.1). Notably, Pout provides
a structured representation of the hair’s outer region, en-
abling the generation of coherent and high-quality 2D hair
structure renderings.
Subsequently, we employ a hair generation network
DeepMVSHair [13] and improved it to adjust to our
pipeline, denoted as DeepMVSHair* (N). This network
is pre-trained on a synthetic 3D hair database and takes
in the 2D undirectional strand maps derived from Pout to
deduce the hair’s intricate inner structure, represented as
Pin = N(R(Pout)) (Sec. 3.2), where R denotes the ren-
dering operation.
Finally, our strand generation module ζ extracts the hair
strands S from the reconstructed outer layer Pout and the in-
ferred inner structure Pin (Sec. 3.3). This can be formulated
as:
S = ζ(Pout, Pin).
(1)
3.1. Patch-based Multi-View Optimization
As discussed in Sec. 1, a fine-grained exterior structure is
essential for hair reconstruction. However, obtaining such
a high-precision exterior hair structure is nontrivial.
In-
spired by [22], integrating multi-view image information to
produce a 3D line map Pout is a possible solution. How-
ever, their method reconstructs the exterior from scratch
with dense calibrated images and is highly limited by ex-
pensive capture equipment and strict capture conditions. In
response to these limitations, Neural Haircut [30] employs
NeuS [32] to first initialize a coarse 3D hair geometry and
then refines it through differentiable rendering and a learned
data prior. However, this approach applies the data prior to
the overall hair shape, causing a loss of fine-grained hair
details. Additionally, the representation of hair geometry
using a signed distance field (SDF) further exacerbates the
3


(d) Image
(a) Raw point cloud
(b) Line map
(c) Refined line map
Figure 3. Visualization of the line map extracted from raw geom-
etry.
over-smoothness. Thus, our method reconstructs the exte-
rior geometry of hair without any hair data prior constraint,
preserving as many details from the image as possible.
Specifically, we first initialize the coarse hair structure
using the point cloud extracted from NeRF [1, 20, 21] in-
stead of NeuS [32]. For efficiency, we utilize the Instant-
NGP framework [21] and obtain an initial coarse geome-
try by applying a threshold of 2.5 to the learned density
values. Subsequently, we densely sample around the ob-
tained coarse geometry to obtain Praw. Our key observa-
tion is that although Praw is very noisy and even terrible, it
encompasses nearly all of the hair’s exterior geometry, as
illustrated in Fig. 3 (a). Thus, our proposed PMVO is de-
signed to first eliminate the noise (points not belonging to
the hair) while preserving the fine-grained geometry of the
hair and then calculate a 3D growing direction at each re-
maining point.
Input Data. The input of our PMVO consists of the
coarse point cloud Praw and an image set, uniformly sam-
pled from the captured monocular video. Subsequently, for
each image, we obtain three maps: a 2D orientation map O,
a confidence map C, and a depth map D. The 2D orientation
map O and the confidence map C are extracted using the Ga-
bor filter similar to the previous work [24]. O contains the
2D hair growth direction at each pixel while C measures the
confidence of the estimated direction. The depth map D is
obtained by directly rendering the depth of Praw with the es-
timated camera parameters from COLMAP [28]. D serves
as the cue for judging the visibility V p of point p ∈Praw
by: V p = 1 −pz−D(Π(p))
τ
, where pz is the z coordinate
of p and Π is the projection function. τ represents a visible
threshold, which we set to 5mm in our experiment to dif-
ferentiate between the exterior (visible regions) and inner
regions (invisible regions) of the hair. These maps will be
used to calculate our cost function, as described below.
Cost Function. For each point p ∈Praw, our PMVO at-
tempts to find a correct 3D line Lp by integrating informa-
tion from all views in which p is visible. Here, the cor-
rect 3D line should minimize our proposed cost function
Lopt, which describes the similarity between the projected
2D line lp of Lp and the 2D orientation in the corresponding
views as follows:
Lopt(p, Lp) =
PN
i=1 wigi(Oi(Πi(p)), lp
i )
PN
i=1 wi
,
(2)
Ray γ
x
p
Patch sample around xi
xi
Reference  view
Figure 4. Schematic diagram of patch-based multi-view optimiza-
tion.
where i denotes a specific view, lp
i
= Πi(Lp), N is
the number of views used, and wi = V p
i
· Ci(Πi(p)) is
the weight of p in the ith view. gi(Oi(Π(p)), lp
i ) is our
proposed patch-wise angular loss function. This function
measures the angle difference between the 2D orientation
Oi(Πi(p)) corresponding to point p and the projected 2D
line direction lp
i in the ith frame. The key idea for extracting
the hair line map Pout from the raw point cloud Praw is that
each 3D line Lp belonging to the hair can be projected into
all visible views, and its 3D direction projections align with
the corresponding 2D orientations in those views—a char-
acteristic that noise does not possess. Thus, our objective is
to find the best-fitting Lp that minimizes the cost function
Lopt:
Lp = arg min
Lp
Lopt(p, Lp).
(3)
Patch-wise Angular Loss. Our patch-wise angular loss
aims to measure the re-projection cosine difference between
the projected 2D line and the corresponding 2D orientation.
As shown in Fig. 4, for the 2D projection x = Π(p) of p
at each frame, we sample k number of 2D points centered
on x, k = r2, where r is a patch size (set as 5 pixels in
our experiments). Then, we can formulate our patch-wise
angular loss gi as:
gi(Oi(x), lp
i ) =
X
¯x∈Xi(x)
Ci(¯x)·(1−cos(Oi(¯x), lp
i )), (4)
where Xi is a 2D point set sampled 2D centered on x in the
ith view. This loss function has two advantages. First, it
allows some calibration errors. Second, it can also smooth
the direction of locally adjacent 3D lines, the same as the
properties of hair.
Optimization. As shown in Fig. 4, to solve the cost
function Lopt robustly, we first select a reference frame with
the largest confidence in the frames where p is visible to ini-
tialize Lp with a 3D vector Lp = (O(Π(p)), 0). It’s easy
to find that the correct 3D line Lp should intersect with the
ray γ emitted from the other end of the 2D line lp at the
reference view. Then, in our process of optimizing Lp, we
constrain the direction of Lp by the following regulariza-
4


[0,360]
[0,360]
[0,180]
[0,360]
(a) 
(b)  
(c) 
(d) 
Figure 5. Visualization of different 2D hair growth direction maps.
(a) Portrait image. (b) Orientation map reported in [13]. (c) Ren-
dered strand map. (d) Rendered undirectional strand map.
tion:
Lreg = dist(γ, Ray(p, Lp)),
(5)
where Ray(p, Lp) represents the ray starting from point p
along the Lp direction, and dist(·) is the function for cal-
culating the closest distance between two rays.
Line Refinement. For each p ∈Praw, we filter out the
inner points, which are not visible in all frames. Then we
keep the point p with Lopt(p, Lp) < 0.05 (about 15 de-
grees) as the final Pout, as shown in Fig. 3 (b). However, the
extracted hair’s exterior geometry suffers from some noise.
Therefore, we find 100 neighbors of p, denoted as {pnei},
and calculate the variance between p and {pnei}:
var(p) = cos(Lp, avg(Lpnei)).
(6)
Subsequently, we update the Lp with avg(LPnei) if
var(p) > 0.015 (about 10 degrees) to produce the final
exterior of hair Pout, as shown in Fig. 3 (c).
3.2. Infer Interior Geometry
For a complete acquisition of hair geometry, inferring the
hair’s inner structure is necessary. We employ a method
that incorporates data priors, similar to DeepMVSHair[13].
Their method takes multi-view calibrated images as input
and trains a HairMVSNet on a synthetic dataset to integrate
multi-view hair structure features to infer the hair geome-
try, represented as a pair of a 3D occupancy field and a 3D
orientation field. However, the direct application of this ap-
proach to our problem faces two challenges: 1) the need for
calibrated images and 2) a domain gap between synthetic
and real 2D data. The 2D orientation maps, extracted using
Gabor filters from images, are limited by capture quality
and thus introduce directional ambiguity, a common issue
in 3D hair modeling.
To overcome these limitations, we propose two improve-
ments : 1) Instead of extracting 2D orientation maps from
calibrated images, we render the extracted exterior layer of
hair, Pout, to 16 fixed synthetic views (DeepMVSHair* is
trained using these fixed 16 views), as shown in Fig. 5. Our
key observation is that independently extracting its own 2D
orientation map from each image is easily affected by im-
age quality, viewing angle, and occlusion. In contrast, inte-
grating geometric information from multi-view images into
3D and rendering it into 2D results in clearer geometry and
greater robustness. Furthermore, this process is the same
as the training data preparation.
Additionally, this strat-
egy facilitates the rendering of additional views, enabling
us to produce images from numerous angles and positions
while ensuring the precision of camera parameter settings.
2) While [44] attempted to train a neural network to mitigate
the ambiguity only in the frontal view, it is insufficiently
robust for other views. Our observations suggest that re-
solving ambiguities in the 3D space is often simpler than
directly in the image space. Therefore, we tackle this issue
in a subsequent stage (Sec. 3.3) by defining a 2D undirec-
tional strand map U as:
U = (cos(2 · O), sin(2 · O)),
(7)
where O ∈[0, 180]. Here, O and O + 180 are encoded
into the same color space to better facilitate the training of
DeepMVSHair [13]. Concurrently, we render a depth map
D for each view using our high-quality exterior hair struc-
ture. Consequently, we can infer the inner structure using
the improved DeepMVSHair* as follows:
Pin = N(Pout, U, D).
(8)
Besides, to accommodate the aforementioned modifica-
tions, we also design a new loss function for their orienta-
tion prediction component. Specifically, the predicted 3D
direction d and its opposite direction −d are considered to
be the same direction. This can be formulated by:
Lori = 1
N
N
X
i
min(|| ˆd −d||1
3
, || ˆd + d||1
3
),
(9)
where N is the number of views, ˆd is the ground truth. For
more details, please refer to [13].
3.3. Strand Generation
To generate a complete 3D strand model, we need to merge
Pout and Pin. Specifically, for each point p in Pin, we se-
lectively integrate the points that are invisible in all views,
combining them with Pout to form our final hair geometry
H. This strategy ensures that the data prior does not over-
shadow the details in the hair’s exterior geometry. Subse-
quently, we voxelize the space and convert H to a high-
resolution 3D orientation field and then use forward Euler
and backward Euler to generate segments {s} similar to pre-
vious works [13, 38]. The difference is that we recursively
connect short segments into long strands instead of connect-
ing to the scalp root directly since it is difficult to distinguish
which end of a segment is the root when the short segments
are close to the scalp. Besides, we connect long strands to
the scalp and detect the direction of unconnected strands
using connected strands to resolve direction ambiguity. Al-
gorithm 1 presents our growing step in detail.
5


Image
Image
Neural Haircut
Ours
Ours
Neural Haircut
Figure 6. Qualitative comparison with Neural Haircut [30], which has limited ability to reconstruct complex hairstyles, especially for curly
hair (the reconstruction results are all from their paper). On the contrary, our reconstruction results can maintain more details in the images.
Algorithm 1: Strand Generation
1 Input: Hair scalp Ω, hair segment set {s}
2 Output: Strands connected to scalp Sc
3 Step1: For each segment s, find the nearest
neighbor segment to root (sr
nei) and tip (st
nei)
respectively.
4 Step2: Recursively connect (sr
nei) and (st
nei) to
produce long strand set {sl}
5 while len({sl})̸= 0 do
6
Step3: For each sl, calculate the distance
dist(sl, Ω) of its end (either root or tip) closest
to the scalp. If dist(sl, Ω) < 15mm, include sl
to the set Sc and remove it in {sl}.
7
step4: For each sl, find the neighbor sc in Sc
with a distance dist(sl, sc) < 5mm, having
the most similar growth direction, then resolve
the ambiguity in growth direction based on it.
Where sc ∈Sc.
8
Step5: For the remaining sl, find the neighbor
sc in Sc with a distance dist(sl, sc) < 2mm,
and connect it with the closest point on sc.
9 end
Thresholds: mm / degrees
Method
2/20
3/30
4/40
2/20
3/30
4/40
2/20
3/30
4/40
Precision
Recall
F-score
DeepMVSHair [13]
43.9
67.2
79.5
9.2
19.5
24.8
15.2
30.2
37.8
DeepMVSHair*
49.5
77.1
86.3
9.3
19.0
25.1
15.7
30.5
38.9
Neural Haircut [30]
52.9
78.1
88.4
9.8
17.8
26.3
16.4
28.7
40.3
Ours
60.8
83.3
92.1
10.4
19.3
25.9
17.8
31.3
40.4
Table 1.
Quantitative comparison with [13, 30].
Our method
achieves the highest precision and F-score.
Method
coarse geometry
fine geometry
strand generate
total
Neural Haircut [30]
24-36h
48-72h
/
72-108h
Ours
5min
3-4h
1-2h
4-6h
Table 2. Comparison with Neural Haircut [30] in terms of time
consumption. Our method is ten times faster.
4. Evalution
We train our improved DeepMVSHair* model on USC-
HairSalon [10], which includes 343 hairstyles aligned with
a template head. To augment the dataset, we applied ran-
dom translations, rotations, and scaling, resulting in a total
of 2,744 strand models. We evaluate our method through a
comprehensive evaluation, encompassing both quantitative
and qualitative comparisons, using synthetic data [41] and
public real-world H3DS dataset [25] as well as real-world
monocular video captures (Sec. 4.1). We also conduct an
ablation study to evaluate the importance of each compo-
nent of our method (Sec. 4.2). Implementation details and
more experiments please refer to supplementary materials.
4.1. Comparison
Baselines. We compare MonoHairwith strand-based hair
modeling methods [13, 30, 38, 44], as well as a popular 3D
reconstruction method [32] and a NeRF-based method [21].
Where Neural Haircut [30] reconstructs a strand model
from a monocular video, consistent with our input. Deep-
MVSHair [13] is a strand-based reconstruction method
based on sparse multi-view images. In our evaluation, we
compare our method with basic DeepMVSHair and our im-
proved implementation (DeepMVSHair*), using both syn-
thetic [41] and real-world data. NeuS [32] is a representa-
tive reconstruction method based on an SDF representation,
while Instant-NGP [21] is commonly used for novel view
synthesis. We compare our method with these methods and
6


Image
Instant-NGP
NeuS
NeuS-PMVO
Ours
Figure 7. Qualitative comparison with Instant-NGP [21] and NeuS [32]. These volumetric approaches can only produce coarse hair
geometry. We also compare the results with another initialization method (NeuS-PMVO). Although they yield similar results, initializing
coarse geometry using NeuS tends to obscure fine-grained details.
Image
Ours
DeepMVSHair*
DeepMVSHair
Figure 8. Qualitative comparison with DeepMVSHair [13] on the
H3DS[25] dataset. Since the 2D orientation maps extracted from
the images may be inconsistent across different views, their results
cause some lost geometry. Our improved DeepMVSHair* effec-
tively addresses this issue, though there are still some details lost
due to data prior limitations. In contrast, our method escapes these
limitations and achieves a high-fidelity result with richer details.
NeuS-PMVO, where NeuS-PMVO is our method with the
SDF representation as coarse initialization geometry. Fi-
nally, we also provide comparisons with single-view based
methods NeuralHDHair[38] and HairStep [44] in the sup-
plementary materials.
Qualitative comparison with Neural Haircut [30] is
shown in Fig. 6.
Their approach tends to yield straight
strands and lacks the ability to effectively represent curly
hair, primarily due to the imposition of overly strong con-
straints by the data prior. Besides, the hair geometry rep-
resentation using SDF also limits some curly strands into a
smooth surface (see below for more discussion). In contrast,
it is evident that our method exhibits greater robustness for
curly hair. We also conduct a quantitative comparison with
them [30] on the synthetic dataset [41]. The comparison re-
sults are shown in Tab. 1. Our method achieves the highest
precision and F-score. Moreover, we also compare the two
methods in terms of reconstruction efficiency as shown in
Tab.2. Neural Haircut takes 3-4 days for each subject on
a single NVIDIA RTX 3090, which significantly limits its
practical application, while ours only takes 4-6 hours.
We provide qualitative comparisons with Instant-NGP,
NeuS, and NeuS-PMVO. Instant-NGP and NeuS can only
produce a coarse hair geometry, our method can achieve
more robust and accurate results than them. It is impor-
tant to note that the results obtained by NeRF-based meth-
ods often exhibit lots of noise, and NeuS is more effective
in obtaining clean 3D geometry. However, as shown in the
last two columns of Fig. 7, the results of NeuS-PMVO are
smoother in some details, and thus we choose Instant-NGP
to initialize the coarse geometry.
Quantitative and qualitative comparisons with Deep-
MVSHair are given in Tab. 1 and Fig. 8, respectively.
While their method is capable of generating plausible ge-
ometry, its performance is significantly impacted by the
quality of the input 2D orientation map. On the other hand,
taking in undirectional strand maps derived from the 3D line
map, the proposed DeepMVSHair* can produce a better
result. However, since the learning method is limited by the
distribution of the data prior, the obtained results may differ
7


Figure 9. Given a monocular video, our method can reconstruct a high-fidelity strand model, including intricate curly hair. For more results
please refer to the supplementary materials.
from the captured images in detail. In contrast, our method
synthesizes a high-quality exterior structure of the hair and
only applies data priors to the invisible inner geometry, re-
sulting in superior results.
As shown in Fig. 9, we also provide some challenging
cases of real-world video capture to evaluate our method.
Our method can robustly reconstruct diverse hairstyles, in-
cluding straight, wavy, and curly hair, and achieve high-
quality and realistic results. For more examples, please re-
fer to our supplementary materials.
4.2. Ablation Study
We evaluate the performance of each component of our
method via an ablation study on real data and synthetic data
[41]. As shown in Fig. 10, without PMVO, errors in cam-
era parameters lead to the removal of many hair points as
noise, resulting in the loss of some hair strands. On the
other hand, when DeepMVSHair* is not applied, the results
lack internal structures, appearing as a shell comprised of
isolated segments. For more ablation studies please refer to
our supplementary materials.
5. Conclusion and Discussion
In this paper, we have rethought the existing multi-view
based hair reconstruction pipeline, where most methods ap-
ply the learned data prior directly to the reconstruction of
the entire hairstyle, which is extremely limited by the di-
versity of training databases.
To this end, we proposed
MonoHair, a generic framework that bifurcates hair mod-
eling into exterior and interior geometries. It extracts the
Image
w/o PMVO
Full
w/o DeepMVSHair*
Figure 10. Qualitative evaluation of each key component of our
method. PMVO helps produce a high-quality exterior hair geom-
etry. While DeepMVSHair* helps infer the internal geometry to
obtain a complete hair geometry.
exterior hair structure from multiview images without rely-
ing on data priors. Subsequently, the framework deduces
the inner hair structure by combining learned data priors
with the extracted high-quality exterior hair structure. Ex-
tensive experiments demonstrated that our method employ-
ing coarse geometry produced by [21] combined with the
proposed PMVO and inner inference module can can re-
construct a high-fidelity strand model and support various
hairstyles, including curly hair.
As shown in Fig. 9 and Fig. 11, the main limitation
of our method is that, while we can successfully recon-
struct the majority of hair geometry, due to severe inter-
sections and occlusions, some intricate hairstyles (such as
braids), the connection relationships may be incorrect. This
is primarily because despite we can reconstruct high-quality
hair exterior, the inner geometry remains dependent on the
data prior. In principle, expanding the dataset to include a
more diverse range of hairstyles or directly reconstructing
the interior structure using computed tomography similar to
CT2Hair [29] can alleviate this limitation.
Figure 11. The main limitation of our method is that the connec-
tion relationships may be incorrect in instances with severe inter-
sections and occlusions.
Acknowledgements
This work is supported in part by the NSF China (No.
62172363).
Besides, We thank the State Key Lab of
CAD&CG for providing the computational resources for
this work. We also sincerely thank Vanessa Sklyarova for
providing the data and reconstruction results to compare
with Neural Haircut.
8


References
[1] Jonathan T Barron, Ben Mildenhall, Matthew Tancik, Peter
Hedman, Ricardo Martin-Brualla, and Pratul P Srinivasan.
Mip-nerf: A multiscale representation for anti-aliasing neu-
ral radiance fields. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Inter-
national Conference on Computer Vision, pages 5855–5864,
2021. 3, 4
[2] Jonathan T Barron, Ben Mildenhall, Dor Verbin, Pratul P
Srinivasan, and Peter Hedman. Mip-nerf 360: Unbounded
anti-aliased neural radiance fields.
In Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, pages 5470–5479, 2022. 3
[3] Xudong Cao, Yichen Wei, Fang Wen, and Jian Sun. Face
alignment by explicit shape regression. International journal
of computer vision, 107(2):177–190, 2014. 1
[4] Menglei Chai, Tianjia Shao, Hongzhi Wu, Yanlin Weng, and
Kun Zhou. Autohair: Fully automatic hair modeling from a
single image. ACM Transactions on Graphics, 35(4), 2016.
3
[5] Blender Online Community. Blender - a 3D modelling and
rendering package. Blender Foundation, Stichting Blender
Foundation, Amsterdam, 2023. 11, 14
[6] Yao Feng, Weiyang Liu, Timo Bolkart, Jinlong Yang, Marc
Pollefeys, and Michael J. Black.
Learning disentangled
avatars with hybrid 3d representations. arXiv, 2023. 3
[7] Qiancheng Fu, Qingshan Xu, Yew Soon Ong, and Wenbing
Tao. Geo-neus: Geometry-consistent neural implicit surfaces
learning for multi-view reconstruction. Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, 35:3403–3416, 2022. 3
[8] Sunil Hadap, Marie-Paule Cani, Ming Lin, Tae-Yong Kim,
Florence Bertails, Steve Marschner, Kelly Ward, and Zoran
Kaˇci´c-Alesi´c. Strands and hair: modeling, animation, and
rendering. In ACM SIGGRAPH 2007 courses, pages 1–150.
2007. 1
[9] Liwen Hu, Chongyang Ma, Linjie Luo, and Hao Li. Robust
hair capture using simulated examples. ACM Transactions
on Graphics, 33(4):1–10, 2014. 3
[10] Liwen Hu, Chongyang Ma, Linjie Luo, and Hao Li. Single-
view hair modeling using a hairstyle database. ACM Trans-
actions on Graphics (ToG), 34(4):1–9, 2015. 2, 3, 6, 11
[11] Liwen Hu, Shunsuke Saito, Lingyu Wei, Koki Nagano, Jae-
woo Seo, Jens Fursund, Iman Sadeghi, Carrie Sun, Yen-
Chun Chen, and Hao Li. Avatar digitization from a single
image for real-time rendering. ACM Transactions on Graph-
ics (ToG), 36(6):1–14, 2017. 1
[12] Zhanghan Ke, Jiayu Sun, Kaican Li, Qiong Yan, and Ryn-
son WH Lau. Modnet: Real-time trimap-free portrait mat-
ting via objective decomposition.
In Proceedings of the
AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pages 1140–
1147, 2022. 11
[13] Zhiyi Kuang, Yiyang Chen, Hongbo Fu, Kun Zhou, and
Youyi Zheng.
Deepmvshair:
Deep hair modeling from
sparse views. In SIGGRAPH Asia 2022 Conference Papers,
pages 1–8, 2022. 2, 3, 5, 6, 7
[14] Hao Li, Laura Trutoiu, Kyle Olszewski, Lingyu Wei, Tristan
Trutna, Pei-Lun Hsieh, Aaron Nicholls, and Chongyang Ma.
Facial performance sensing head-mounted display.
ACM
Transactions on Graphics (ToG), 34(4):1–9, 2015. 1
[15] Kunliang Liu, Ouk Choi, Jianming Wang, and Wonjun
Hwang. Cdgnet: Class distribution guided network for hu-
man parsing. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on
computer vision and pattern recognition, pages 4473–4482,
2022. 11
[16] Linjie Luo, Hao Li, Sylvain Paris, Thibaut Weise, Mark
Pauly, and Szymon Rusinkiewicz. Multi-view hair capture
using orientation fields. In CVPR, 2012. 3
[17] Linjie Luo, Hao Li, and Szymon Rusinkiewicz. Structure-
aware hair capture. ACM Transactions on Graphics, 32(4):
1–12, 2013. 1, 3
[18] Linjie Luo, Cha Zhang, Zhengyou Zhang, and Szymon
Rusinkiewicz. Wide-baseline hair capture using strand-based
refinement. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Com-
puter Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 265–272, 2013.
3
[19] Ben Mildenhall, Pratul P Srinivasan, Matthew Tancik,
Jonathan T Barron, Ravi Ramamoorthi, and Ren Ng. Nerf:
Representing scenes as neural radiance fields for view syn-
thesis. In ECCV, 2020. 2, 3
[20] Ben Mildenhall, Pratul P Srinivasan, Matthew Tancik,
Jonathan T Barron, Ravi Ramamoorthi, and Ren Ng. Nerf:
Representing scenes as neural radiance fields for view syn-
thesis. Communications of the ACM, 65(1):99–106, 2021. 3,
4
[21] Thomas M¨uller, Alex Evans, Christoph Schied, and Alexan-
der Keller. Instant neural graphics primitives with a mul-
tiresolution hash encoding. ACM Transactions on Graphics
(ToG), 41(4):1–15, 2022. 2, 3, 4, 6, 7, 8, 11
[22] Giljoo Nam, Chenglei Wu, Min H Kim, and Yaser Sheikh.
Strand-accurate multi-view hair capture. In Proceedings of
the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, pages 155–164, 2019. 2, 3
[23] Michael Oechsle, Songyou Peng, and Andreas Geiger.
Unisurf:
Unifying neural implicit surfaces and radiance
fields for multi-view reconstruction. In Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision,
pages 5589–5599, 2021. 3
[24] Sylvain Paris, Hector M Briceno, and Franc¸ois X Sillion.
Capture of hair geometry from multiple images. ACM trans-
actions on graphics (TOG), 23(3):712–719, 2004. 3, 4
[25] Eduard Ramon, Gil Triginer, Janna Escur, Albert Pumarola,
Jaime Garcia, Xavier Giro-i Nieto, and Francesc Moreno-
Noguer. H3d-net: Few-shot high-fidelity 3d head reconstruc-
tion. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Confer-
ence on Computer Vision, pages 5620–5629, 2021. 6, 7
[26] Radu Alexandru Rosu, Shunsuke Saito, Ziyan Wang, Chen-
glei Wu, Sven Behnke, and Giljoo Nam.
Neural strands:
Learning hair geometry and appearance from multi-view im-
ages. In European Conference on Computer Vision, pages
73–89. Springer, 2022. 3
[27] Shunsuke Saito,
Liwen Hu,
Chongyang Ma,
Hikaru
Ibayashi, Linjie Luo, and Hao Li. 3d hair synthesis using
volumetric variational autoencoders. ACM Transactions on
Graphics, 37(6):1–12, 2018. 3
9


[28] Johannes L Schonberger and Jan-Michael Frahm. Structure-
from-motion revisited.
In Proceedings of the IEEE con-
ference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pages
4104–4113, 2016. 4, 11
[29] Yuefan Shen, Shunsuke Saito, Ziyan Wang, Olivier Maury,
Chenglei Wu, Jessica Hodgins, Youyi Zheng, and Giljoo
Nam. Ct2hair: High-fidelity 3d hair modeling using com-
puted tomography. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG),
42(4):1–13, 2023. 8
[30] Vanessa Sklyarova, Jenya Chelishev, Andreea Dogaru, Igor
Medvedev, Victor Lempitsky, and Egor Zakharov. Neural
haircut: Prior-guided strand-based hair reconstruction.
In
ICCV, 2023. 2, 3, 6, 7, 11, 12
[31] Shaolin Su, Qingsen Yan, Yu Zhu, Cheng Zhang, Xin Ge,
Jinqiu Sun, and Yanning Zhang. Blindly assess image qual-
ity in the wild guided by a self-adaptive hyper network. In
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vi-
sion and Pattern Recognition, pages 3667–3676, 2020. 11
[32] Peng Wang, Lingjie Liu, Yuan Liu, Christian Theobalt, Taku
Komura, and Wenping Wang. Neus: Learning neural implicit
surfaces by volume rendering for multi-view reconstruction.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.10689, 2021. 3, 4, 6, 7
[33] Yiming Wang, Qin Han, Marc Habermann, Kostas Dani-
ilidis, Christian Theobalt, and Lingjie Liu.
Neus2: Fast
learning of neural implicit surfaces for multi-view recon-
struction.
In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International
Conference on Computer Vision, pages 3295–3306, 2023. 3
[34] Ziyan Wang, Timur Bagautdinov, Stephen Lombardi, Tomas
Simon, Jason Saragih, Jessica Hodgins, and Michael Zoll-
hofer. Learning compositional radiance fields of dynamic
human heads. In CVPR, 2021. 3
[35] Ziyan Wang, Giljoo Nam, Tuur Stuyck, Stephen Lombardi,
Michael Zollh¨ofer, Jessica Hodgins, and Christoph Lassner.
Hvh: Learning a hybrid neural volumetric representation for
dynamic hair performance capture. In CVPR, 2022.
[36] Ziyan Wang, Giljoo Nam, Tuur Stuyck, Stephen Lombardi,
Chen Cao, Jason Saragih, Michael Zollh¨ofer, Jessica Hod-
gins, and Christoph Lassner. Neuwigs: A neural dynamic
model for volumetric hair capture and animation. In Pro-
ceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition, pages 8641–8651, 2023. 3
[37] Chung-Yi Weng,
Brian Curless,
Pratul P Srinivasan,
Jonathan T Barron, and Ira Kemelmacher-Shlizerman. Hu-
mannerf: Free-viewpoint rendering of moving people from
monocular video.
In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF con-
ference on computer vision and pattern Recognition, pages
16210–16220, 2022. 3
[38] Keyu Wu, Yifan Ye, Lingchen Yang, Hongbo Fu, Kun Zhou,
and Youyi Zheng.
Neuralhdhair: Automatic high-fidelity
hair modeling from a single image using implicit neural rep-
resentations. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 1526–
1535, 2022. 3, 5, 6, 7, 11
[39] Lingchen Yang, Zefeng Shi, Youyi Zheng, and Kun Zhou.
Dynamic hair modeling from monocular videos using deep
neural networks. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG), 38
(6):1–12, 2019. 3
[40] Lior Yariv, Yoni Kasten, Dror Moran, Meirav Galun, Matan
Atzmon, Basri Ronen, and Yaron Lipman. Multiview neu-
ral surface reconstruction by disentangling geometry and ap-
pearance. Advances in Neural Information Processing Sys-
tems, 33, 2020. 3
[41] Cem Yuksel, Scott Schaefer, and John Keyser. Hair meshes.
ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG), 28(5):1–7, 2009. 6,
7, 8, 11, 12
[42] Meng Zhang and Youyi Zheng. Hair-gan: Recovering 3d hair
structure from a single image using generative adversarial
networks. Visual Informatics, 3(2):102–112, 2019. 2, 3
[43] Meng Zhang, Menglei Chai, Hongzhi Wu, Hao Yang, and
Kun Zhou. A data-driven approach to four-view image-based
hair modeling. ACM Trans. Graph., 36(4):156–1, 2017. 2, 3
[44] Yujian Zheng, Zirong Jin, Moran Li, Haibin Huang,
Chongyang Ma,
Shuguang Cui,
and Xiaoguang Han.
Hairstep: Transfer synthetic to real using strand and depth
maps for single-view 3d hair modeling. In CVPR, 2023. 3,
5, 6, 7, 11
[45] Yi Zhou, Liwen Hu, Jun Xing, Weikai Chen, Han-Wei Kung,
Xin Tong, and Hao Li. Hairnet: Single-view hair reconstruc-
tion using convolutional neural networks. In ECCV, 2018.
3
10
