Title: Monoclothcap: Towards temporally coherent clothing capture from monocular rgb video

MonoClothCap: Towards Temporally Coherent Clothing Capture
from Monocular RGB Video
Donglai Xiang1*
Fabian Prada2
Chenglei Wu2
Jessica Hodgins1,3
1Carnegie Mellon University
2Facebook Reality Labs Research
3Facebook AI Research
{donglaix,jkh}@cs.cmu.edu
{fabianprada,chenglei}@fb.com
SMPL
Output
Input
SMPL
Output
Input
Figure 1: Given a monocular RGB video as input, our proposed method captures temporally coherent dynamic clothing
deformation that cannot be explained by a bare human body model. From left to right, we show the input frame, body
capture results using the SMPL model [28], and our clothing capture results.
Abstract
We present a method to capture temporally coherent dy-
namic clothing deformation from a monocular RGB video
input. In contrast to the existing literature, our method does
not require a pre-scanned personalized mesh template, and
thus can be applied to in-the-wild videos. To constrain the
output to a valid deformation space, we build statistical de-
formation models for three types of clothing: T-shirt, short
pants and long pants. A differentiable renderer is utilized
to align our captured shapes to the input frames by mini-
mizing the difference in both silhouette, segmentation, and
texture. We develop a UV texture growing method which ex-
pands the visible texture region of the clothing sequentially
in order to minimize drift in deformation tracking. We also
extract ﬁne-grained wrinkle detail from the input videos by
ﬁtting the clothed surface to the normal maps estimated by
a convolutional neural network. Our method produces tem-
porally coherent reconstruction of body and clothing from
monocular video. We demonstrate successful clothing cap-
ture results from a variety of challenging videos. Exten-
sive quantitative experiments demonstrate the effectiveness
of our method on metrics including body pose error and
surface reconstruction error of the clothing.
*Work partly done during internship at Facebook AI Research.
1. Introduction
Dynamic capture of detailed human geometry and mo-
tion from monocular images and videos is attracting in-
creasing attention in the computer vision and computer
graphics community. High-quality human capture would
enable applications in virtual and augmented reality, games,
and movies. In recent years, great progress has been made
on the estimation of general body shape from a single image
or a monocular video [22, 54, 34, 37]. However, capturing
the detailed deformation of clothing as it moves on the hu-
man body is still far from a solved problem.
Capturing a temporally coherent shape for clothing from
monocular RGB imagery is an extremely challenging task,
due to the fundamental ambiguity of single-view 3D recon-
struction and the large deformation space of clothing. Previ-
ous work [53, 16, 17] utilizes a 3D personalized actor model
as a shape prior to track the dynamic clothing deformation.
This model is acquired by multi-view reconstruction on an
additional video of the same actor wearing the same cloth-
ing and rotating in a T-pose. However, such a model is gen-
erally unavailable for in-the-wild videos. The need for a
pre-scanned template model limits the applicability of these
approaches.
With the development of deep neural networks, other
efforts have been made to regress a clothed human shape
directly from a single input image with supervised learn-
ing [48, 33, 43, 47, 59, 4, 44].
These methods produce
1
arXiv:2009.10711v2  [cs.CV]  23 Nov 2020


plausible results for individual input images of common
human poses. However, it is difﬁcult to extend them to
capture temporally coherent dynamic clothing deformation
from monocular videos for the following reasons.
First,
these methods are not robust to the variety of human motion
due to the limited diversity of training data. They can easily
produce incomplete geometry that is difﬁcult to ﬁx via post-
processing. Second, it is non-trivial to estimate the temporal
correspondence from the output of individual frames due to
the data representation used (voxel [48, 59], depth map [47]
or implicit function [48, 33, 43, 47, 59, 4, 44]). This lim-
its the application of these methods in scenarios that require
correspondence, such as clothing retargeting or image edit-
ing.
In this work, we present a novel method to capture dy-
namic clothing deformation from a monocular RGB video
in a temporally coherent manner, as illustrated by Fig. 1.
To the best of our knowledge, it is the ﬁrst attempt to solve
this challenging problem without the prerequisite of a pre-
scanned personalized template [53, 16, 17].
Our method is based on the following observations.
First, a deformation model of the clothing that provides a
statistical shape prior is key to solving the problem. It not
only reduces the ambiguity of single-view 3D reconstruc-
tion, but also helps to estimate temporal correspondence
across frames. While clothing models have been investi-
gated in the existing literature [55, 30] for the purpose of
clothing shape generation, our work is the ﬁrst study that
fully demonstrates the value of a clothing model for RGB-
based clothing capture1. Second, to solve the clothing cap-
ture problem, we make use of human appearance informa-
tion including silhouette, segmentation, texture and surface
normal. We present a novel method to integrate all those im-
age measurements using a differentiable renderer [27, 12].
Our method captures the realistic dynamic of clothing in a
temporally coherent manner including ﬁne-grained wrinkle
details from various videos.
Our Contributions.
(1) We present the ﬁrst approach
for temporally coherent clothing capture from a monocu-
lar RGB video without using a pre-scanned template of the
subject. (2) We propose a novel method to capture cloth-
ing deformation by ﬁtting statistical clothing models to im-
age measurements including silhouette, segmentation, tex-
ture and surface normal with a differentiable renderer.
2. Related Work
Single-Image Human Pose and Shape Estimation. Most
previous work in human pose estimation focuses on the
position of body keypoints in 2D [50, 11, 10] and 3D
[60, 38, 46].
Because estimating 3D pose from single
1Due to the limitation in types of available clothing data to train our
model, in this paper, we assume that the subject to be captured wears a
T-shirt on the upper body and shorts or pants on the lower body.
images is highly ill-posed, deformable human models in-
cluding SMPL [28], SMPL-X [36] and Adam [21] are
used to help with the problem by ﬁtting the models to im-
ages [8, 36, 52]. These models not only provide a strong
prior for body pose, but also enable estimation of 3D body
shape from single images. Deformable human models can
be further integrated in deep neural network architectures
[22, 34, 37, 54]. These networks are usually trained in a
weakly-supervised manner without full 3D supervision.
Because deformable human models are not able to ex-
press clothing shape, all the work above only estimates
body shapes with minimal clothing. Detailed clothing shape
has been largely ignored in the previous literature, except a
few papers [48, 33, 43, 59, 47, 13]. These methods use
deep neural networks to infer dense clothed human shapes
in various data representation including voxels [48, 59],
depth maps [47], point clouds [13] and implicit functions
[33, 43, 44, 19], all with supervised learning. However, be-
cause the amount of available training data is very limited,
these methods are not robust to human motion. In addition,
it is non-trivial to estimate correspondence across frames re-
quired for clothing capture due to their data representation.
Our method achieves temporally coherent body and cloth-
ing capture in terms of both geometry and correspondence
with the help of a statistical clothing model.
Garment Modeling and Reconstruction. Human cloth-
ing, especially physically based simulation of garments
[6, 9, 49, 45, 26], has been extensively studied due to its
important role in animation. Recently, there is growing in-
terest in modeling garments in a data-driven manner. Pons-
Moll et al. [39] proposes a method to automatically segment
4D clothed human scans into different garment pieces, and
track the deformation of each piece over time. The cap-
tured clothing data can be further used to train a deformable
model, either a linear model [55] or a deep neural network
[30]. In those methods, the clothing models are primarily
used for shape generation, while we use the model to track
clothing deformation from a monocular video.
Another line of work reconstructs clothing shape from
images by allowing per-vertex deformation on top of the
SMPL body model. Alldieck et al. [3, 2] builds clothed
human avatar from videos of a person slowly rotating in A-
pose. This is further improved to use only images of several
different views [1, 7] or even a single image [4]. However,
these methods reconstruct clothing as static objects without
considering the temporal dynamics. By contrast, in this pa-
per, we address the challenging problem of capturing cloth-
ing dynamics from a monocular video.
Monocular Human Performance Capture. Motion cap-
ture and performance capture refer to the capture of space-
time coherent human motion sequences in the form of
sparse 3D joints and surface geometry respectively. Many
approaches have been developed to enable motion and per-


Body Estimation 
(Sec 5.1)
Clothing Capture 
(Sec 5.2)
Wrinkle Extraction 
(Sec 5.3)
Input Frame
Figure 2: An overview of our clothing capture pipeline.
formance capture from multi-view inputs [40, 42, 41, 18].
Here we focus on monocular-based capture methods. Mehta
et al. [32, 31] proposes systems to capture body skeleton
motion from a single RGB video in real time. Some per-
formance capture methods [56, 57] are proposed to capture
dense human body and clothing geometry from a monocu-
lar RGB-D video using a double-layer representation. Most
relevant to our work are performance capture methods from
monocular RGB videos [53, 16]. These methods, however,
require a pre-scanned mesh template of the subject, which
restricts the applications where they can be used. Haber-
mann et al. [17] further proposes to train a deep neural
network to deform a pre-scanned mesh template to match
the surface deformation in the video. This method, requires
the mesh template and multi-view images of the subject for
network training. Our method relaxes the constraint to sce-
narios such as in-the-wild videos where neither pre-scanned
templates nor multi-view images are available.
3. Method Overview
In this section, we present an overview of our approach.
Our goal is to capture the dynamic deformation of three
types of garments, T-shirt, shorts and pants, along with
the underlying body shape from a monocular video. Our
method takes as input a sequence of images, denoted as
{Ii}F
i=1, where F is the number of frames in the sequence.
The subject is assumed to be wearing a T-shirt for the upper
body. The clothing for the lower body is manually identi-
ﬁed as either short pants or long pants. Our method out-
puts a sequence of mesh pairs {Mb
i, Mc
i}F
i=1, where Mb
i
denotes the body mesh and Mc
i denotes the clothed mesh.
{Mb
i}F
i=1 and {Mc
i}F
i=1 are both temporally coherent with
ﬁxed topology across time. Mb
i and Mc
i share the same
vertex positions except for the clothing region.
Our method makes use of linear clothing deformation
models deﬁned in the canonical pose. We brieﬂy describe
our model formulation and model building procedure in
Section 4. Our pipeline to capture clothing from a monoc-
ular video consists of four stages, explained in Section 5.
First, we estimate the underlying body pose and shape of
subject (Section 5.1). Then, we run sequential tracking of
the clothing using our linear clothing models. This step
is followed by a batch optimization stage including all the
frames to produce temporally coherent dynamic clothing
deformation (Section 5.2). In the ﬁnal stage, we add ﬁne-
grained wrinkle detail to our results (Section 5.3). A visu-
alization of this pipeline is shown in Fig. 2.
4. Statistical Clothing Deformation Model
Statistical models of clothing have been investigated for
clothing shape generation in the previous literature [55, 30],
but have yet to be exploited for capturing clothing from a
monocular video. In this section we give the mathematical
formulation of our clothing deformation models and brieﬂy
describe the procedure to learn these models from data.
4.1. Model Formulation
Our clothing models are built on top of the SMPL body
model [28]. SMPL is controlled by a set of model param-
eters (β, θ), where β ∈R10 is the shape coefﬁcients and
θ ∈R72 is the joint angles that control body pose. We
denote the set of nv = 6890 output vertices by M(β, θ).
Then formally,
M(β, θ) = W(T(β, θ), J(β), θ, W),
(1)
where W is the Linear Blend Skinning (LBS) function;
T(β, θ) is the rest pose body shape; J(β) is the locations of
24 kinematic joints; W is the blend weights. In particular,
the unposed shape T(β, θ) is deﬁned as the sum of template
shape T, shape dependent deformation BS(β) and pose de-
pendent deformation BP (θ),
T(β, θ) = T + BS(β) + BP (θ)
(2)
On top of the SMPL model, an extra additive offset ﬁeld
D is introduced to account for clothing deformation in rest
pose, i.e.,
T c = T(β, θ) + D.
(3)
D includes a number of nv per-vertex offsets, each denoted
by Dj ∈R3, where 1 ≤j ≤nv. Here we decompose
D into offsets from the upper clothing Du and offsets from
the lower clothing Dl. Du and Dl share the same dimen-
sionality as D. They take non-zero values if the respective
garments cover body vertex j; for an exposed skin vertex
we have Du
j = Dl
j = 0. Notice that some body vertices
might be covered by both upper and lower clothing, for ex-
ample, around the waist. To account for this phenomenon,
we merge Du and Dl into a single offset ﬁeld D by
Dj =
(
Du
j
if ∥Du
j ∥≥∥Dl
j∥,
Dl
j
otherwise.
(4)


T
T(β, θ)
T(β, θ) + Du(zu)
T(β, θ) + Dl(zl)
T(β, θ) + D(z)
M c(β, θ, z)
Figure 3: A visualization of our clothing model formulation. From left to right, we show (1) the mean SMPL template,
(2) personalized body shape with pose dependent deformation, (3) upper clothing offsets, (4) lower clothing offsets, (5)
combined clothing offsets, and (6) posed clothing output.
The dimensions of Du and Dl are very high (3nv), so we
use PCA dimension reduction to enable control with low-
dimensional parameters zu, zl ∈Rnz. Formally,
Dk(zk) = Akzk + dk, k ∈{u, l}
(5)
where Ak ∈R3nv×nz is the matrix of PCA bases and dk
is the mean value vector. We use the skinning function W
of SMPL to transform the clothed shape from rest pose to
target pose. Finally, our clothing model is formulated as
M c(β, θ, z) = W(T c(β, θ, z), J(β), θ, W),
(6)
T c(β, θ, z) = T(β, θ) + D(z),
(7)
where z = {zu, zl} is the collection of clothing parameters.
A visual illustration of our clothing model formulation is
shown in Figure 3.
4.2. Model Building
We build our models from the BUFF dataset [58], a col-
lection of high-resolution 4D people scan. We build a model
for each of the three garment types in the dataset, T-shirts,
shorts and pants. For each garment type k, we need to train
the model parameters {Ak, dk} from a collection of cloth-
ing offsets, denoted by Xk ∈R3nv×nk, where nk is the
number of samples for garment type k in the dataset. To
obtain each sample in the collection, we follow [58, 39] to
register the raw scan with SMPL model. This operation not
only brings the raw scan data into the same topology, but
also “unposes” the human shape with clothing into the rest
pose, denoted by Xc. We also follow [58] to estimate the
underlying body shape of the subject in rest pose, denoted
by Xb. In addition, we obtain a per-vertex binary mask σk
that has value 1 for the region of garment type k and 0 for
any other regions (skin and other clothing types) by ren-
dering the meshes to images and applying a state-of-the-art
clothing segmentation algorithm [14]. Then we obtain the
clothing offset data Xk for garment type k by
Xk = (Xc −Xb) ⊙σk,
(8)
where ⊙denotes the element-wise multiplication. We use
a standard PCA training algorithm based on Singular Value
Decomposition (SVD), leaving nz = 50 bases in our model.
We refer readers to the original papers [58, 39] for details
on scan registration and underlying body shape estimation.
5. Monocular Clothing Capture
Given the pre-trained clothing models, we now present
our approach for temporally coherent clothing capture from
only a monocular video.
5.1. Body Motion Estimation
In the ﬁrst stage, we estimate underlying body motion
in 3D with the SMPL body model. We estimate per-frame
SMPL pose parameters θi and global translation ti ∈R3,
together with SMPL shape parameters β across the whole
sequence. Meanwhile, we estimate the camera intrinsics K
of a full perspective projection model for all the frames. In
order to achieve good robustness under different in-the-wild
scenarios, we integrate a variety of different image measure-
ments into an energy optimization problem. Formally, we
solve the following minimization problem:
min
β,{θi,ti}F
i=1,K Eb = Eb
2d + Eb
dp + Eb
sil + Eb
pof + Eb
reg. (9)
In particular, Eb
2d is the squared L2 error between projected
SMPL joints and 2D keypoint detection from OpenPose
[50, 11, 10]. Eb
dp, also used in Guler et al. [15], is an energy
term for dense correspondence estimation from DensePose
[5]. Speciﬁcally, for any pixel p in the image with Dense-
Pose prediction, we identify the corresponding SMPL ver-
tex index j(p) and optimize an energy term deﬁned as
Eb
dp = 1
F
F
X
i=1
X
p
∥Π(Mj(p)(β, θi) + ti; K) −p∥2,
(10)
where Π denotes the projection function determined by the
camera intrinsics K. Eb
sil is the silhouette matching term.


We extract silhouettes Si of our SMPL body mesh with a
differentiable renderer [27], and obtain the target silhouette
ˆSi from a clothing segmentation algorithm [14]. We use an
Intersection-over-Union error [27]
Eb
sil = 1
F
F
X
i=1
 
1 −
∥Si ⊙ˆSi∥1
∥Si + ˆSi −Si ⊙ˆSi∥1
!
.
(11)
Eb
pof is an error term based on 3D orientation between ad-
jacent joints in the body skeleton hierarchy. We match the
spatial orientation of SMPL body joints to the prediction
of Part Orientation Field (POF) similar to [52]. We refer
readers to the original papers [52, 29] for details. We also
apply regularization on our estimation, denoted by Eb
reg,
which consists of a Mixture of Gaussian prior for body pose
{θi}F
i=1 [8], L2 regularization on the shape parameters β,
and temporal smoothness terms to reduce motion jitters.
After solving the energy optimization, we obtain a tem-
porally consistent body mesh for every frame by Mb
i =
M(β, θi). We ﬁx the SMPL parameters β, {θi, ti}F
i=1 and
camera parameters K during later stages of our pipeline.
The estimated body meshes provide a strong guidance for
the subsequent estimation of clothing deformation.
5.2. Clothing Deformation Capture
We now illustrate our proposed method to capture cloth-
ing deformation. Compared to previous work [53, 16, 17]
where a pre-scanned template of the subject is assumed, this
problem is signiﬁcantly more challenging due to the lack of
strong shape prior to resolve the single-view 3D ambigu-
ity, and the lack of a pre-deﬁned personalized texture that
provides correspondence for surface tracking. To solve this
problem, we (1) exploit the deformation space learned in
our clothing models and (2) progressively extract a person-
alized texture from the input image sequence to enable sur-
face tracking across time and reduce drifting.
We perform clothing capture in a sequential manner. For
each frame i, we estimate per-frame clothing parameters for
clothing on the upper and lower body zi = {zu
i , zl
i} given
the input image Ii, initializing from the result of the previ-
ous frame zi−1. We formulate the task as solving an energy
optimization problem, formally,
min
zi Ec = Ec
sil + Ec
seg + Ec
photo + Ec
reg.
(12)
Now we explain each cost term individually. An illustration
of the different cost terms is shown in Fig. 4.
Silhouette matching term Ec
sil: Similar to Eb
sil in the ﬁrst
stage, we use a differentiable renderer to match the sil-
houette of our rendering output with a target silhouette ex-
tracted from the original image. Differently, here what we
compare with target silhouette is the silhoutte of human
shape with clothing M c(β, θi, zi), instead of bare body
shape M(β, θi) in the previous stage.
geometry
texture
mask
M c(zi)
Ti
T′
i
texture
silhouette
offset
Ii
ˆSi
ˆSk
i
Ec
photo
Ec
sil
Ec
seg
photometric 
term
silhouette 
term
segmentation 
term
R(·)
Figure 4: Explanation of the energy terms used for cloth-
ing capture.
We obtain the rendered texture, silhouette
and clothing offset with a differentiable renderer, which are
compared with target images using different energy terms.
Clothing segmentation term Ec
seg: Clothing segmentation
[14] provides not only the overall silhouette of the person,
but also the boundary between different garment regions
and exposed skin in the image. We utilize this information
by penalizing the clothing offset on vertices whose projec-
tion falls outside the segmentation region. Concretely, the
differentiable renderer is used to render the per-vertex offset
ﬁelds Du(zu
i ), Dl(zl
i) on the clothed mesh M c(zi)2; we de-
note the output by R
 Dk(zk
i )

, where k represents either
u for upper clothing or l for lower clothing. In addition,
we denote the segmentation masks for the clothing region
k ∈{u, l} by ˆSk
i . Then we have
Ec
seg =
X
k∈{u,l}
X
p
(1 −ˆSk
i ) ⊙
R
 Dk(zk
i )
2 ,
(13)
where p iterates over all pixels in the image. Effectively,
for each clothing type we penalize the clothing offset out-
side the corresponding clothing region, where ˆSk
i is 0. The
gradient in the image domain is propagated to the mesh by
the differentiable renderer R.
Photometric tracking term Ec
photo: This term is introduced
to estimate temporal correspondence more accurately, es-
pecially when the garments we capture have high-contrast
texture. We progressively build a personalized RGB texture
image Ti in a pre-deﬁned UV space of SMPL model, along
with a binary mask T′
i that indicates texels where RGB val-
ues in Ti have been identiﬁed. The photometric tracking
term is deﬁned to compare the rendered output of our cloth-
ing models using Ti with the input image. For this purpose
2SMPL body parameters β, θi and ti are ﬁxed in this stage thus omit-
ted here.


we use a differential renderer that works with UV texture
[12, 20], and denotes the rendered output as R (Ti). We
also render the mesh with T′
i to indicate pixels where tex-
ture from Ti is available. Formally, we have
Ec
photo =
X
p
∥R (Ti) −Ii∥2 ⊙R (T′
i) ,
(14)
where the summation is taken over the pixels in the image.
After the optimization in Eq. 12 is solved for frame i, we
update Ti, T′
i to obtain Ti+1, T′
i+1, which will be used for
solving optimization for frame i + 1. To achieve this, we
project Ii to the mesh surface and ﬁll in new RGB values to
UV texels in Ti where no previous values have been iden-
tiﬁed, indicated by 0s in T′
i. Corresponding texels in T′
i
are also set to 1 to obtain T′
i+1. This process is initialized
by setting T1 and T′
1 to 0; in other words, the photomet-
ric tracking term takes no effect for the ﬁrst frame in the
sequence, since no texture has been extracted.
Regularization term Ec
reg: Our clothing deformation mod-
els are PCA-based linear models. They may produce unrea-
sonable shapes when the parameters z are large. Therefore
we apply regularization on the cloth parameters using an
adaptive cost function ρ that penalizes large input values:
Ec
reg = ρ
 ∥zi∥2
.
(15)
The sequential tracking stage is then followed by a batch
optimization stage that optimize for all F frames in the se-
quence together. The energy function we use is the same as
the previous stage (Eq. 12) with an additional term that pe-
nalizes too drastic temporal change of clothing parameters,
which helps to produce temporally stable results. This term
is deﬁned as
Ec
temp =
1
F −1
F −1
X
i=1
∥zi+1 −zi∥2.
(16)
The output of batch optimization stage is a sequence of cap-
ture results with clothing {Mc
i = M c(β, θi, zi)}F
i=1.
5.3. Wrinkle Detail Extraction
Up to the batch optimization stage, we can capture large
clothing deformation. However, the results are limited by
low mesh resolution and unable to capture the ﬁne-grained
wrinkles on the clothing. Therefore, the last stage of our ap-
proach is to extract wrinkle details from the original images
and apply them to our coarsely tracked meshes.
Traditionally, such wrinkle details are captured with
Shape from Shading (SfS) [51, 2]. For in-the-wild monocu-
lar clothing capture, we empirically ﬁnd it difﬁcult to extract
wrinkles reliably by SfS due to complex garment albedo,
large variation of lighting conditions and self-shadowing.
Recently, we observed the success of learning-based ap-
proaches in estimating accurate surface normal for human
appearance using neural networks [47, 44]. The estimated
surface normal provides strong and direct clues on how the
wrinkles should be added to our clothing capture results in
order to match the original images.
Formally, let us denote the output of a surface normal es-
timation network for frame i to be In
i , a 3-channel normal
map for each pixel in the original image. We ﬁrst subdivide
the mesh Mc
i with Loop subdivision to increase the spatial
resolution, with the subdivided mesh denoted by Ms
i. Then,
we solve for a deformed mesh Oi whose rendered normal
map matches the estimated normal map In
i in the garment
region. We denote the rendered normal output by Rn(Oi),
where Rn is the differential renderer. We solve the follow-
ing optimization problem for each frame i individually:
min
Oi Ew = Ew
normal + Ew
reg + Ew
lpl,
(17)
Ew
normal =
X
p∈ˆSc
i
∥∇Rn(Oi) −∇In
i ∥2,
(18)
Ew
reg = ∥Oi −Ms
i∥2, Ew
lpl = ∥LOi∥2 .
(19)
where ∇denotes the image gradient operator, and L de-
notes the mesh Laplacian operator, ˆSc
i = ˆSu
i
S ˆSl
i is the
union of all pixels in the clothing segmentation masks. Here
we penalize the difference between normal maps in the im-
age gradient domain to be more tolerant to error in absolute
normal direction from the neural network. We also restrict
the deformation of Oi from Ms
i be in the direction of the
camera rays. Here, we use the implementation of differen-
tiable renderer in [12, 20] and surface normal network in
[44]. The ﬁnal results are the deformed meshes {Oi}F
i=1.
6. Quantitative Evaluation
In this section, we present the results of quantitative eval-
uation. We use a benchmark sequence from the MonoPerf-
Cap dataset [53] and video sequences rendered from BUFF
dataset [58] to test the performance of our method.
6.1. Evaluation on MonoPerfCap Dataset
Experiment Setting. We follow previous work [53] to use
the Pablo sequence in their dataset to perform quantitative
comparison. Surface meshes and 3D joints obtained by a
multi-view performance capture method [42] are provided
as the ground truth in the dataset. We compare our method
with a state-of-the-art template-based performance capture
method [53]3 and single-image human reconstruction meth-
ods [59, 43, 44, 4, 61]. Body pose is not estimated in [4], so
we apply our estimated body pose to their T-pose results.
Evaluation of Clothing Surface Reconstruction. We ﬁrst
evaluate our method using a surface reconstruction metric.
3Monocular capture results are provided by the author.


Input
Ours 
Front
Ours 
Side
Unavailable
Unavailable
GT 
Front
GT 
Side
Figure 5: Visualization of experiment results on the Pablo
sequence. From top to bottom we show original images, our
results from the front and side views, and ground truth from
the front and side views. The ground truth mesh for the last
frame is not provided in the dataset.
Due to the intrinsic depth-scale ambiguity of single-view re-
construction, we compute a global scaling factor from our
result to the ground truth, which is applied to our result be-
fore comparison. Following [53] we align our results to the
ground truth with a translation to eliminate the global depth
offsets. We compute the average point-to-surface distance
from all the ground truth vertices in the clothing region to
the output mesh as the evaluation metric. The clothing re-
gion (the T-shirt and shorts) is obtained by manual segmen-
tation on the ground truth surface mesh. The same proce-
dure is applied to all the methods under evaluation. A visu-
alization of our results is shown in Fig. 5.
We report the mean surface error averaged across all
frames in the middle column of Table 1. For the visual-
ization of per-frame error curves please refer to our sup-
plementary material. Our method achieves a signiﬁcantly
lower surface error compared to all previous single-image
surface reconstruction methods.
Our performance even
comes close to the template-based tracking method [53]
which requires a pre-scanned personalized template that
provides strong prior information about the body and cloth-
ing shape of the subject. By contrast, our method does not
require a pre-processed template, and therefore can be ap-
plied to a wider range of videos.
Methods
Surface Error
Joint Error
MonoPerfCap* [53]
14.6
118.7
HMD [61]
31.9
-
Tex2Shape [4]
27.7
-
DeepHuman [59]
24.2
-
PIFu [43]
30.5
-
PIFuHD [44]
26.5
-
Ours
17.9
77.3
Table 1: Quantitative comparison with previous work on
Pablo sequence using mean point-to-surface error and mean
joint error across frames. All numbers are in mm. The
method annotated with ‘*’ uses a pre-scanned personalized
template that provides a strong shape prior. Please see our
supplementary material for per-frame error.
Front View
Front-left View
Left View
Figure 6: Visualization of three viewpoints in the BUFF
evaluation. In each view we show the input image, body
estimation result, and clothing capture result.
Evaluation of 3D Pose Estimation. Although body pose
estimation is not a focus of this paper, we follow [53] to
validate our method on the metric of 3D joint error on the
Pablo sequence. Average per-joint 3D position error after
alignment with translation is reported in Table 1 (right). Our
method achieves an error of 77.3 mm, signiﬁcantly lower
than 118.7 mm in [53]. This veriﬁes the effectiveness of
our body pose initialization that utilizes various image mea-
surements including 2D joints, dense correspondences, sil-
houette, etc.
6.2. Evaluation on BUFF Dataset
Experiment Setting. BUFF [58] is a dataset of high-
resolution 4D textured scan sequences of ﬁve people. In
this experiment, we sample a test sequence from the BUFF
dataset (00096-shortlong hips, ﬁrst 200 frames) and train
a pair of upper and lower clothing models with the data
of four other people. We render the sequence from three
views: front, left and front-left, as visualized in Fig. 6. We
evaluate our method in four stages: body initialization, se-
quential tracking, batch optimization and wrinkle extrac-
tion The evaluation protocol is the same as Section 6.1: we
rigidly align the estimated and ground truth meshes with
a global scaling and translation, and compute average dis-
tance from ground truth clothing vertices to our results.
Results.
The quantitative results are shown in Table 2.
First, from all three viewpoints, results with clothing con-


Figure 7: Examples of our clothing capture results. In each example, we show the input image, capture results from the front
view and the side view. Please see our supplementary video for complete results.
Front
Front-left
Left
Body only
29.4
30.3
29.2
Clothed w/o batch
26.8
25.5
24.7
Clothed w/ batch
26.7
25.3
24.7
Clothed w/ wrinkle
26.8
25.5
24.9
Table 2: Quantitative ablation study of different stages
of our method on the rendered BUFF dataset using mean
point-to-surface error. All numbers are in mm. Please see
our supplementary material for per-frame error.
sistently achieve lower reconstruction error than body only.
This veriﬁes that our method captures clothing shape that
cannot be explained by the SMPL body shape space. Sec-
ond, we can see that temporal smoothing and wrinkle ex-
traction, which improve the visual quality as shown in qual-
itative results, have little inﬂuence on the reconstruction er-
ror. Third, our results show similar range of error in the
clothing region across different views, implying that our
method is not very sensitive to the viewpoint variation.
7. Qualitative Evaluation
We qualitatively evaluate our method on various videos
including public benchmark and in-the-wild videos where
no pre-scanned template is available. Example results are
shown in Figure 7. Please see our supplementary video for
full results and qualitative comparison with other work.
As shown in the supplementary video, our result not only
demonstrates better temporal robustness than the single-
image 3D human reconstruction methods in terms of recon-
structed surfaces, but also provides 3D temporal correspon-
dences effectively shown by the re-rendering of our output
mesh with a consistent texture map. This is hard to obtain
by methods that regress 3D shape in voxels [48, 59], depth
maps [47] or implicit functions [33, 43, 44].
Template-
based monocular performance capture methods [53, 16]
rely heavily on non-rigid surface regularization such as
As-Rigid-As-Possible (ARAP), which often prevents those
methods from capturing natural dynamics of the clothing
deformation. In comparison, our method is able to capture
more realistic dynamics of the garment with regularization
provided by the clothing models.
In addition, we perform extensive ablation studies on
various loss terms used in our pipeline. Please refer to our
supplementary document for the results.
8. Conclusion and Future Work
In this paper, we have presented a method to capture tem-
porally coherent dynamic deformation of clothing from a
monocular video. To the best of our knowledge, we have
shown the ﬁrst result of temporally coherent clothing cap-
ture from a monocular RGB video without using a pre-
scanned template. Our results on various in-the-wild videos
endorse the effectiveness and robustness of our method.
Our method is limited by the types of garments in the
available training data. We have demonstrated results on
several types of tight clothing. Treatment of free-ﬂowing
garments like skirts requires collection of more data and ad-
ditional design of the clothing model. Our method is con-
strained in the ability to capture drastically changing defor-
mations due to the limited expressiveness of our models,
which may be addressed by using higher-capacity models
like a deep neural network. We also would like to further
incorporate physics into the clothing models to enable more
physically realistic clothing capture.
Acknowledgements. We would like to thank Eric Yu for
his help with the rendering of our results using Blender.


References
[1] T. Alldieck, M. Magnor, B. L. Bhatnagar, C. Theobalt, and
G. Pons-Moll.
Learning to reconstruct people in clothing
from a single rgb camera. In Proceedings of the IEEE Con-
ference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages
1175–1186, 2019. 2
[2] T. Alldieck, M. Magnor, W. Xu, C. Theobalt, and G. Pons-
Moll. Detailed human avatars from monocular video. In
2018 International Conference on 3D Vision (3DV), pages
98–109. IEEE, 2018. 2, 6
[3] T. Alldieck, M. Magnor, W. Xu, C. Theobalt, and G. Pons-
Moll. Video based reconstruction of 3d people models. In
Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition, pages 8387–8397, 2018. 2
[4] T. Alldieck, G. Pons-Moll, C. Theobalt, and M. Magnor.
Tex2shape: Detailed full human body geometry from a sin-
gle image. In Proceedings of the IEEE International Confer-
ence on Computer Vision, pages 2293–2303, 2019. 1, 2, 6,
7
[5] R. Alp G¨uler, N. Neverova, and I. Kokkinos. Densepose:
Dense human pose estimation in the wild. In Proceedings
of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, pages 7297–7306, 2018. 4
[6] D. Baraff and A. Witkin. Large steps in cloth simulation.
In Proceedings of the 25th annual conference on Computer
graphics and interactive techniques, pages 43–54, 1998. 2
[7] B. L. Bhatnagar, G. Tiwari, C. Theobalt, and G. Pons-Moll.
Multi-garment net: Learning to dress 3d people from im-
ages. In IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision
(ICCV). IEEE, oct 2019. 2
[8] F. Bogo, A. Kanazawa, C. Lassner, P. Gehler, J. Romero,
and M. J. Black. Keep it smpl: Automatic estimation of 3d
human pose and shape from a single image. In European
Conference on Computer Vision, pages 561–578. Springer,
2016. 2, 5
[9] R. Bridson, S. Marino, and R. Fedkiw. Simulation of cloth-
ing with folds and wrinkles. In Proceedings of the 2003 ACM
SIGGRAPH/Eurographics symposium on Computer anima-
tion, pages 28–36, 2003. 2
[10] Z. Cao, G. H. Martinez, T. Simon, S.-E. Wei, and Y. A.
Sheikh. Openpose: Realtime multi-person 2d pose estima-
tion using part afﬁnity ﬁelds. IEEE Transactions on Pattern
Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 2019. 2, 4
[11] Z. Cao, T. Simon, S.-E. Wei, and Y. Sheikh. Realtime multi-
person 2d pose estimation using part afﬁnity ﬁelds. In Pro-
ceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition, pages 7291–7299, 2017. 2, 4
[12] W. Chen, H. Ling, J. Gao, E. Smith, J. Lehtinen, A. Jacob-
son, and S. Fidler. Learning to predict 3d objects with an
interpolation-based differentiable renderer. In Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems, pages 9605–9616,
2019. 2, 6
[13] V. Gabeur, J.-S. Franco, X. Martin, C. Schmid, and G. Ro-
gez. Moulding humans: Non-parametric 3d human shape
estimation from single images. In Proceedings of the IEEE
International Conference on Computer Vision, pages 2232–
2241, 2019. 2
[14] K. Gong, Y. Gao, X. Liang, X. Shen, M. Wang, and L. Lin.
Graphonomy: Universal human parsing via graph transfer
learning. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Com-
puter Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 7450–7459,
2019. 4, 5
[15] R. A. Guler and I. Kokkinos. Holopose: Holistic 3d human
reconstruction in-the-wild. In Proceedings of the IEEE Con-
ference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages
10884–10894, 2019. 4, 13
[16] M. Habermann, W. Xu, M. Zollhoefer, G. Pons-Moll, and
C. Theobalt. Livecap: Real-time human performance cap-
ture from monocular video. ACM Transactions on Graphics
(TOG), 38(2):1–17, 2019. 1, 2, 3, 5, 8
[17] M. Habermann, W. Xu, M. Zollhofer, G. Pons-Moll, and
C. Theobalt.
Deepcap:
Monocular human performance
capture using weak supervision.
In Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, pages 5052–5063, 2020. 1, 2, 3, 5
[18] Z. Huang, T. Li, W. Chen, Y. Zhao, J. Xing, C. LeGendre,
L. Luo, C. Ma, and H. Li.
Deep volumetric video from
very sparse multi-view performance capture. In Proceedings
of the European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV),
pages 336–354, 2018. 3
[19] Z. Huang, Y. Xu, C. Lassner, H. Li, and T. Tung. Arch: Ani-
matable reconstruction of clothed humans. In Proceedings of
the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, pages 3093–3102, 2020. 2
[20] K. M. Jatavallabhula, E. Smith, J.-F. Laﬂeche, C. F. Tsang,
A. Rozantsev, W. Chen, and T. Xiang. Kaolin: A pytorch
library for accelerating 3d deep learning research.
arXiv
preprint arXiv:1911.05063, 2019. 6
[21] H. Joo, T. Simon, and Y. Sheikh. Total capture: A 3d de-
formation model for tracking faces, hands, and bodies. In
Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and
pattern recognition, pages 8320–8329, 2018. 2
[22] A. Kanazawa, M. J. Black, D. W. Jacobs, and J. Malik. End-
to-end recovery of human shape and pose. In Proceedings
of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, pages 7122–7131, 2018. 1, 2
[23] A. Kanazawa, J. Y. Zhang, P. Felsen, and J. Malik. Learn-
ing 3d human dynamics from video. In Proceedings of the
IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recogni-
tion, pages 5614–5623, 2019. 13
[24] M. Kocabas, N. Athanasiou, and M. J. Black. Vibe: Video
inference for human body pose and shape estimation. In Pro-
ceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition, pages 5253–5263, 2020. 13
[25] N. Kolotouros, G. Pavlakos, M. J. Black, and K. Daniilidis.
Learning to reconstruct 3d human pose and shape via model-
ﬁtting in the loop. In Proceedings of the IEEE International
Conference on Computer Vision, pages 2252–2261, 2019. 13
[26] J. Li,
G. Daviet,
R. Narain,
F. Bertails-Descoubes,
M. Overby, G. E. Brown, and L. Boissieux.
An implicit
frictional contact solver for adaptive cloth simulation. ACM
Transactions on Graphics (TOG), 37(4):1–15, 2018. 2
[27] S. Liu, T. Li, W. Chen, and H. Li. Soft rasterizer: A dif-
ferentiable renderer for image-based 3d reasoning. In Pro-


ceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Computer
Vision, pages 7708–7717, 2019. 2, 5
[28] M. Loper, N. Mahmood, J. Romero, G. Pons-Moll, and M. J.
Black. Smpl: A skinned multi-person linear model. ACM
transactions on graphics (TOG), 34(6):1–16, 2015. 1, 2, 3
[29] C. Luo, X. Chu, and A. Yuille. Orinet: A fully convolutional
network for 3d human pose estimation. In BMVC, 2018. 5
[30] Q. Ma, J. Yang, A. Ranjan, S. Pujades, G. Pons-Moll,
S. Tang, and M. J. Black. Learning to dress 3d people in
generative clothing. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Con-
ference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages
6469–6478, 2020. 2, 3
[31] D. Mehta, O. Sotnychenko, F. Mueller, W. Xu, M. El-
gharib, P. Fua, H.-P. Seidel, H. Rhodin, G. Pons-Moll, and
C. Theobalt. Xnect: Real-time multi-person 3d motion cap-
ture with a single rgb camera. ACM Transactions on Graph-
ics (TOG), 39(4):82–1, 2020. 3
[32] D. Mehta,
S. Sridhar,
O. Sotnychenko,
H. Rhodin,
M. Shaﬁei, H.-P. Seidel, W. Xu, D. Casas, and C. Theobalt.
Vnect: Real-time 3d human pose estimation with a single rgb
camera. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG), 36(4):1–14,
2017. 3
[33] R. Natsume, S. Saito, Z. Huang, W. Chen, C. Ma, H. Li,
and S. Morishima. Siclope: Silhouette-based clothed people.
In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition, pages 4480–4490, 2019. 1, 2, 8
[34] M. Omran, C. Lassner, G. Pons-Moll, P. Gehler, and
B. Schiele. Neural body ﬁtting: Unifying deep learning and
model based human pose and shape estimation. In 2018 in-
ternational conference on 3D vision (3DV), pages 484–494.
IEEE, 2018. 1, 2
[35] A. Paszke, S. Gross, F. Massa, A. Lerer, J. Bradbury,
G. Chanan, T. Killeen, Z. Lin, N. Gimelshein, L. Antiga,
et al. Pytorch: An imperative style, high-performance deep
learning library. In Advances in Neural Information Process-
ing Systems, pages 8024–8035, 2019. 13
[36] G. Pavlakos, V. Choutas, N. Ghorbani, T. Bolkart, A. A. Os-
man, D. Tzionas, and M. J. Black. Expressive body capture:
3d hands, face, and body from a single image. In Proceed-
ings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, pages 10975–10985, 2019. 2
[37] G. Pavlakos, N. Kolotouros, and K. Daniilidis.
Texture-
pose: Supervising human mesh estimation with texture con-
sistency. In Proceedings of the IEEE International Confer-
ence on Computer Vision, pages 803–812, 2019. 1, 2
[38] G. Pavlakos, X. Zhou, K. G. Derpanis, and K. Daniilidis.
Coarse-to-ﬁne volumetric prediction for single-image 3d hu-
man pose. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Com-
puter Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 7025–7034,
2017. 2
[39] G. Pons-Moll, S. Pujades, S. Hu, and M. J. Black. Clothcap:
Seamless 4d clothing capture and retargeting. ACM Trans-
actions on Graphics (TOG), 36(4):1–15, 2017. 2, 4
[40] H. Rhodin, N. Robertini, D. Casas, C. Richardt, H.-P. Seidel,
and C. Theobalt. General automatic human shape and motion
capture using volumetric contour cues. In European confer-
ence on computer vision, pages 509–526. Springer, 2016. 3
[41] N. Robertini,
F. Bernard,
W. Xu,
and C. Theobalt.
Illumination-invariant robust multiview 3d human motion
capture. In 2018 IEEE Winter Conference on Applications
of Computer Vision (WACV), pages 1661–1670. IEEE, 2018.
3
[42] N. Robertini, D. Casas, H. Rhodin, H.-P. Seidel, and
C. Theobalt. Model-based outdoor performance capture. In
2016 Fourth International Conference on 3D Vision (3DV),
pages 166–175. IEEE, 2016. 3, 6
[43] S.
Saito,
Z.
Huang,
R.
Natsume,
S.
Morishima,
A. Kanazawa, and H. Li.
Pifu:
Pixel-aligned implicit
function for high-resolution clothed human digitization.
In Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on
Computer Vision, pages 2304–2314, 2019. 1, 2, 6, 7, 8
[44] S. Saito, T. Simon, J. Saragih, and H. Joo. Pifuhd: Multi-
level pixel-aligned implicit function for high-resolution 3d
human digitization. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Con-
ference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages
84–93, 2020. 1, 2, 6, 7, 8
[45] L. Sigal, M. Mahler, S. Diaz, K. McIntosh, E. Carter,
T. Richards, and J. Hodgins. A perceptual control space for
garment simulation. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG),
34(4):1–10, 2015. 2
[46] X. Sun, B. Xiao, F. Wei, S. Liang, and Y. Wei. Integral hu-
man pose regression. In Proceedings of the European Con-
ference on Computer Vision (ECCV), pages 529–545, 2018.
2
[47] S. Tang, F. Tan, K. Cheng, Z. Li, S. Zhu, and P. Tan. A neural
network for detailed human depth estimation from a single
image. In Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference
on Computer Vision, pages 7750–7759, 2019. 1, 2, 6, 8
[48] G. Varol, D. Ceylan, B. Russell, J. Yang, E. Yumer, I. Laptev,
and C. Schmid. Bodynet: Volumetric inference of 3d human
body shapes. In Proceedings of the European Conference on
Computer Vision (ECCV), pages 20–36, 2018. 1, 2, 8
[49] P. Volino, N. Magnenat-Thalmann, and F. Faure. A simple
approach to nonlinear tensile stiffness for accurate cloth sim-
ulation. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG), 28(4):1–16,
2009. 2
[50] S.-E. Wei, V. Ramakrishna, T. Kanade, and Y. Sheikh. Con-
volutional pose machines. In Proceedings of the IEEE con-
ference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages
4724–4732, 2016. 2, 4
[51] C. Wu, C. Stoll, L. Valgaerts, and C. Theobalt. On-set perfor-
mance capture of multiple actors with a stereo camera. ACM
Transactions on Graphics (TOG), 32(6):1–11, 2013. 6
[52] D. Xiang, H. Joo, and Y. Sheikh. Monocular total capture:
Posing face, body, and hands in the wild. In Proceedings
of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, pages 10965–10974, 2019. 2, 5, 13
[53] W. Xu, A. Chatterjee, M. Zollh¨ofer, H. Rhodin, D. Mehta,
H.-P. Seidel, and C. Theobalt. Monoperfcap: Human perfor-
mance capture from monocular video. ACM Transactions on
Graphics (ToG), 37(2):1–15, 2018. 1, 2, 3, 5, 6, 7, 8
[54] Y. Xu, S.-C. Zhu, and T. Tung.
Denserac: Joint 3d pose
and shape estimation by dense render-and-compare. In Pro-
ceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Computer
Vision, pages 7760–7770, 2019. 1, 2
