Title: Drivable avatar clothing: Faithful full-body telepresence with dynamic clothing driven by sparse rgb-d input

Drivable Avatar Clothing: Faithful Full-Body Telepresence with
Dynamic Clothing Driven by Sparse RGB-D Input
Donglai Xiang
donglaix@cs.cmu.edu
Carnegie Mellon University
USA
Fabian Prada
fabianprada@meta.com
Meta Reality Labs Research
USA
Zhe Cao
zhecao@berkeley.edu
Meta Reality Labs Research
USA
Kaiwen Guo
guokaiwen_neu@126.com
Meta Reality Labs Research
USA
Chenglei Wu
chengleiwu@gmail.com
Meta Reality Labs Research
USA
Jessica Hodgins
jkh@cmu.edu
Carnegie Mellon University
USA
Timur Bagautdinov
timurb@meta.com
Meta Reality Labs Research
USA
RGB-D Input
Our Output
Our Output
Ground Truth
Ground Truth
RGB-D Input
Figure 1: We present photorealistic full-body avatars that can be driven by sparse RGB-D views (along with body pose and
facial keypoints) and faithfully reproduce the appearance and dynamics of challenging loose clothing from the input views.
We show the input views, our output and the ground truth reference images in each group of results.
ABSTRACT
Clothing is an important part of human appearance but challeng-
ing to model in photorealistic avatars. In this work we present
avatars with dynamically moving loose clothing that can be faith-
fully driven by sparse RGB-D inputs as well as body and face motion.
We propose a Neural Iterative Closest Point (N-ICP) algorithm that
can efficiently track the coarse garment shape given sparse depth
input. Given the coarse tracking results, the input RGB-D images
are then remapped to texel-aligned features, which are fed into
Work done when DX was a visiting researcher at Meta. ZC and CW are now at Google.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s).
SA Conference Papers ’23, December 12–15, 2023, Sydney, NSW, Australia
© 2023 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 979-8-4007-0315-7/23/12.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3610548.3618136
the drivable avatar models to faithfully reconstruct appearance
details. We evaluate our method against recent image-driven syn-
thesis baselines, and conduct a comprehensive analysis of the N-ICP
algorithm. We demonstrate that our method can generalize to a
novel testing environment, while preserving the ability to produce
high-fidelity and faithful clothing dynamics and appearance.
CCS CONCEPTS
• Computing methodologies →Computer graphics; Com-
puter vision.
KEYWORDS
Telepresence, photorealistic avatars, clothing capture
ACM Reference Format:
Donglai Xiang, Fabian Prada, Zhe Cao, Kaiwen Guo, Chenglei Wu, Jessica
Hodgins, and Timur Bagautdinov. 2023. Drivable Avatar Clothing: Faithful
Full-Body Telepresence with Dynamic Clothing Driven by Sparse RGB-D
arXiv:2310.05917v2  [cs.GR]  11 Oct 2023


SA Conference Papers ’23, December 12–15, 2023, Sydney, NSW, Australia
Xiang, D. et al
Input. In SIGGRAPH Asia 2023 Conference Papers (SA Conference Papers ’23),
December 12–15, 2023, Sydney, NSW, Australia. ACM, New York, NY, USA,
11 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3610548.3618136
1
INTRODUCTION
Photorealistic avatars are important for enabling truly immersive
and believable telepresence experiences. An ideal telepresence ap-
plication should not only produce plausible-looking results, but also
be complete and accurate: all salient aspects of human appearance
should be captured and resynthesized to fully match the real-world
states of the subject. However, these properties are particularly
challenging to achieve with clothing, an integral part of human
appearance, due to its complex movements on human body.
To deal with this challenge, some previous methods go beyond
treating clothing effectively as a part of the human body [Bagaut-
dinov et al. 2021; Liu et al. 2021] and perform explicit modeling of
clothing as a separate layer on top of the underlying body [Xiang
et al. 2022, 2021]. These methods can work well for pose-driven
animation, i.e., synthesizing plausible clothing deformation and
photorealistic appearance that are perceptually compatible with
the input pose signal. However, there is no guarantee that the ani-
mation output will faithfully reproduce the actual states of clothing
(Fig. 6), and potentially distorting the conveyed social signals. In
fact, the dynamics of clothing cannot be fully explained by the
body pose of the current frame or a few previous frames. Given
two distinct initial states of clothing, the same body motion can
result in completely different trajectories of clothing deformations,
especially for loose garments like skirts or dresses. Therefore, it is
impossible to infer accurate clothing states given such incomplete
input signals.
An alternate approach for telepresence relies heavily on the
availability of sensory inputs without a strong human prior. For
example, volumetric fusion methods [Dou et al. 2017, 2016; New-
combe et al. 2015] produce a complete geometrical representation
of a scene by tracking and fusing observations from sparse RGB-D
cameras. Neural implicit functions can also be utilized to recon-
struct a dynamically moving human surface from sparse camera
inputs [Shao et al. 2022a; Yu et al. 2021b], or even to directly model
the radiance field of clothed human appearance [Lin et al. 2022;
Shao et al. 2022b]. In theory, these methods are flexible enough to
be able to reconstruct arbitrary shape from the given input streams.
However, due to a lack of model constraints, it is generally more
challenging for these methods to achieve high-fidelity temporal
coherency especially with noisy or incomplete input, and the out-
put quality is heavily tied with the sensory input. For example, it
is hard to produce the sharp and subtle detail in hands [Shao et al.
2022b] with the limited resolution and noise, and the observed and
unobserved regions from the input can have obvious difference
in the output quality [Shao et al. 2022a]. Human priors have been
introduced to regularize the predictions [Kwon et al. 2021, 2023],
but the ability to reliably handle loose clothing has not been clearly
demonstrated.
To leverage the benefits of both families of approaches, we can
rely on explicit avatar models as a prior, but expand the driving
signal to include the denser input in addition to the body pose.
We build avatars with dynamic clothing that can be driven from
a sparse set of RGB-D cameras (usually three unless otherwise
stated). This formulation allows for more faithful resynthesis of the
human appearance, including clothing details. We build on top of
DVA [Remelli et al. 2022], which proposes the texel-conditioned
avatar, an encoder-decoder model that takes in UV-aligned driving
features and predicts geometry and appearance for rendering. How-
ever, DVA only works well for tight clothing that closely follows
underlying body, due to the limitation in relying on a generic body
shape prior.
To better handle loose clothing, our insight is to introduce a
tracking stage that coarsely aligns the loose clothing surface with
the input depth. More specifically, we propose a simple-yet-effective
Neural Iterative Closest Points (N-ICP) algorithm to iteratively up-
date a clothing deformation model given the feedback from surface
error in a data-driven manner. N-ICP combines the flexibility of
the classical ICP methods which allows us to handle large clothing
deformations, while relying on learning for more efficient inference
and reliable geometry estimates. In contrast to DVA, which uses
coarse body geometry to extract features, the N-ICP tracking allows
us to extract more accurate and meaningful texel-aligned features.
It also eases the burden on the encoder-decoder model, since large
deformations and misalignments are handled by the coarse tracking,
and ultimately leads to better quality and generalization. In addition,
several technical components have been leveraged to further im-
prove the texel-conditioned avatars. To aid geometry prediction, we
augment texel-aligned features with geometry features computed
from depth and coarsely tracked geometry. To improve appearance,
we adopt a specific perceptual loss to encourage high-frequency
texture detail on the predicted clothing.
Our contributions can be summarized as follows:
• We develop photorealistic full-body avatars with dynamic
clothing that faithfully reproduces the original states of sub-
ject’s appearance and geometry. These avatars are driven
by sparse (up to 3) RGB-D inputs and enable free-viewpoint
rendering.
• As an important component of our system, we introduce
a Neural Iterative Closest Point algorithm that learns to
iteratively find the most effective parameter update to track
the input point cloud efficiently with a deformation model.
• Our avatars can directly generalize to a novel testing envi-
ronment with a different background and illumination, while
capturing the complex clothing dynamics and preserving
the original high-quality appearance from the training data.
We also provide an option to finetune the model to adapt to
the new appearance in the novel environment.
2
RELATED WORK
We focus on related work in three areas: photorealistic clothed
avatars, sensing-based telepresence, and image-conditioned novel-
view synthesis and learning to optimize for non-rigid tracking.
Photorealistic Clothed Avatars. Here we discuss approaches pose-
driven avatars that model both the shape and photorealistic appear-
ance of clothed humans leanrned directly from captured images in
a data-driven manner. Depending on the appearance model, these
methods can be roughly divided into three categories: methods that
combine coarse human geometry with Deferred Neural Rendering
[Grigorev et al. 2021; Raj et al. 2021; Thies et al. 2019], methods


Faithful Full-Body Telepresence with Dynamic Clothing Driven by Sparse RGB-D Input
SA Conference Papers ’23, December 12–15, 2023, Sydney, NSW, Australia
Texel- 
Conditioned 
Clothed Avatar
Neural 
Iterative 
Closest Point
Initial Tracking
Clothing Deformation 
Model
Fused Point Cloud
Sparse RGB-D 
Driving Images
Texel-Aligned 
Features
Output Image
Unwrap
{Ic, Dc}
P
D
D(θ)
FI
FD
Body Pose
Viewpoint
ρ
v
Figure 2: An overview of our method. The Neural Iterative Closest Point module efficiently tracks the clothing surface from the
input point cloud P with a clothing deformation model D(𝜽); the initial tracking result D is then used to unwrap the driving
images 𝐼𝑐and depth maps 𝐷𝑐into texel-aligned features F𝐼, F𝐷, which are then fed into the texel-conditioned avatar, together
with body pose 𝝆, facial keypoints and viewpoint v, to predict the output image.
that incorporate a human prior into Neural Radiance Fields [Li et al.
2022; Liu et al. 2021; Mildenhall et al. 2020; Peng et al. 2021a; Su et al.
2021; Zheng et al. 2022], and methods based on mesh and dynamic
texture [Habermann et al. 2021; Shysheya et al. 2019]. Our method
is more closely related to the Full-Body Codec Avatars [Bagautdi-
nov et al. 2021] among the third category, as well as the followup
work that can handle dynamic clothing [Xiang et al. 2022, 2021].
Most of these methods learn a mapping from body pose or motion
to clothed body appearance, without resolving the ambiguity in
clothing states for similar body poses. Drivable Volumetric Avatars
(DVA) [Remelli et al. 2022] is an exception, which is additionally
conditioned on a dynamic texture unwrapped from sparse driving
views to incorporate the clothing information. However, it is limited
to tight clothing due to a constraint in body representation. Our
method can further track and render dynamically moving loose
clothing realistically.
Sensing-Based Telepresence Approaches. Another category of ap-
proaches for telepresence rely more heavily on the sensing input
for surface reconstruction, usually from one or several RGB(-D)
cameras. Volumetric fusion [Dou et al. 2017, 2016; Newcombe et al.
2015] and multiview-conditioned implicit functions [Shao et al.
2022a; Suo et al. 2021; Yu et al. 2021b] have been utilized to re-
construct scene geometry from the sensor input. Early work only
reconstructs the geometry [Newcombe et al. 2015], but later work
also predicts color by warping and blending RGB information from
input views [Dou et al. 2016; Lawrence et al. 2021], possibly assisted
by deep neural networks [Shao et al. 2022a; Suo et al. 2021; Yu et al.
2021b]. Neural rendering has also been introduced [Martin-Brualla
et al. 2018; Nguyen-Ha et al. 2022] to compensate for artifacts in the
reconstructed geometry. These sensing-based methods enjoy the
flexibility in handling varying topology, but are generally more sen-
sitive to noisy or missing input than the model-based approaches
described in the previous section.
Image-Conditioned Novel-View Synthesis. Our task can also be
regarded as Novel-view Synthesis (NVS) based on sparse input
images. Generalizable NeRF is a group of methods that extend the
Neural Radiance Field (NeRF) [Mildenhall et al. 2020] and allow
the reconstruction of a scene with sparse images as input without
per-scene optimization [Chen et al. 2021; Lin et al. 2022; Shao et al.
2022b; Wang et al. 2021; Yu et al. 2021a]. This formulation is thus
more suitable for telepresence than the original NeRF, but tends to
perform less well when the target view is far away from the sparse
input views due to the inherent 3D ambiguity. To alleviate this
problem, some methods incorporate prior knowledge of the human
body to achieve better quality. Neural Body [Peng et al. 2021b]
utilizes the SMPL model to aggregate the temporal information
over the multiview videos. It still does not allow direct use of novel
images as input, but this limitation is addressed in Neural Human
Performer [Kwon et al. 2021] and GP-NeRF [Chen et al. 2022].
Several other methods [Gao et al. 2023, 2022; Kwon et al. 2023;
Zhao et al. 2022] predict radiance fields in a canonical space with
the help of forward and inverse skinning transformations. These
methods additionally allow generalization across identities, which
is not the focus of our work. KeypointNeRF [Mihajlovic et al. 2022]
utilizes 3D body keypoints to encode the spatial information in the
rendered volume. These methods have shown limited capability to
handle dynamic loose clothing due to the body representation.
Learning to Optimize for Non-Rigid Tracking. Many non-rigid
tracking and reconstruction problems are traditionally formulated
as optimization. Examples include SMPL model fitting for 3D human
pose estimation [Bogo et al. 2016], and non-rigid ICP for deformable
surface tracking [Guo et al. 2015]. In recent years, researchers at-
tempted to incorporate deep neural networks into these problems
[Bhatnagar et al. 2020; Bozic et al. 2020, 2021; Li et al. 2020]. Our
N-ICP formulation essentially treats the neural network as an opti-
mization solver that iteratively generates a parameter update. Some
work [Corona et al. 2022; Song et al. 2020] explores a similar idea


SA Conference Papers ’23, December 12–15, 2023, Sydney, NSW, Australia
Xiang, D. et al
for monocular human pose reconstruction in a supervised setting.
RMA-Net [Feng et al. 2021] also addresses the non-rigid registration
problem with recurrent update. In addition to the difference in de-
formation model and loss function, our method integrates learning
into optimization more deeply by explicit feeding the error and
gradient into the network for update prediction, which is shown to
be the key to effectiveness in the ablation study.
3
METHOD OVERVIEW
Our method takes as input RGB-D images from sparse (up to 3)
views, as well as 3D body pose in the form of joint angles (and facial
keypoints if available), and generates photorealistic rendering of the
subject from an arbitrary viewpoint. The model is trained on images
of the subject captured in a dense camera system. We adopt the
two-layer representation that has proven effective in previous work
on loose clothing [Xiang et al. 2022, 2021]. Our method consists
of two major modules. First, in the Neural Iterative Closest Point
module, we coarsely track the loose clothing surface given the fused
point cloud from the input depth maps using a deformation graph
model. Second, we convert the sparse driving RGB-D images into
texel-aligned features and feed them into texel-conditioned clothed
avatars to infer detailed geometry and view-dependent texture,
which are then rasterized to form the output image. The overall
pipeline is illustrated in Fig. 2.
4
NEURAL ITERATIVE CLOSEST POINT
As the first step of our approach, we introduce a Neural Iterative
Closest Point (N-ICP) algorithm to coarsely track the dynamic
clothing surface using a deformation graph representation of the
clothing geometry. Such a module is needed for two reasons. First,
coarse tracking provides rough correspondences on the clothing
surface across different frames. Previous work [Xiang et al. 2022,
2021] shows that such canonicalization reduces the variance in
appearance that needs to be modelled by the downstream module
and leads to improved quality. Second, compared with skeleton-
level tracking [Remelli et al. 2022], the deformation graph enjoys the
flexibility to track the surface at a higher accuracy from the input
depth, so that the following stage (Sec. 5) only needs to predict a
small geometry correction. This concept of coarse-to-fine modeling
has also proven useful in previous work, e.g. [Habermann et al.
2021].
Non-Rigid ICP. The classical approach to track a deforming sur-
face is the non-rigid Iterative Closest Point (ICP) algorithm [Li et al.
2008]. Given a deformation model D controlled by deformation
parameters 𝜽, the non-rigid ICP algorithm tracks an input point
cloud1 P by solving the following minimization problem
min
𝜽
𝐿ICP(𝜽; P) = min
𝜽
∑︁
p∈P
∥C(p, D(𝜽)) −p∥2,
(1)
where C queries the closest point on the deformed mesh D(𝜽)
from a point p in the point cloud based on Euclidean or projective
distance. To keep the deformed mesh in a smooth shape, some
regularization terms are often used together with Eq. (1) to penal-
ize extreme distortion. This non-linear optimization problem is
1At test time, the point cloud comes from fused driving depth images. We only use the
points from the regions of dynamic clothing identified by image segmentation.
P
θ(0)
D(θ(0))
C(p, D(θ(0)))
M
r
g
∆θ
θ(1)
C(p, D(θ(1)))
M
r
g
∆θ
. . .
θ(N)
D(θ(1))
D(θ(N))
Figure 3: The Neural Iterative Closest Point algorithm. In
each iteration, we perform the closest point query between
the input point cloud P and deformed clothing model D(𝜽(𝑖)).
The residual r and gradient g are then passed to a neural
network M, which finds the best update Δ𝜽to the parameters.
This process is repeated for 𝑁iterations.
usually solved by the Gauss-Newton method, especially its Leven-
berg–Marquardt variant. Concretely, in each iteration of optimiza-
tion, the algorithm evaluates the residual vector r, which consists of
offset r(p) = C(p, D(𝜽))−p for each point p in the point cloud, and
the Jacobian J of each residual term with respect to the parameters.
Then the algorithm searches for the update Δ𝜽by solving the linear
system (J𝑇J + 𝜆I)Δ𝜽= −J𝑇r, where 𝜆> 0 is a damping coefficient.
The parameters are updated by 𝜽(𝑖+1) = 𝜽(𝑖) + Δ𝜽, where 𝑖denotes
the index of iteration.
N-ICP. The problem of driving avatars for online telepresence
poses a challenge in terms of both robustness and speed for the
non-rigid tracking algorithm. The nonlinear minimization problem
in Eq. (1) relies heavily on good initialization, so classical method
usually requires sequential tracking that is hard to recover from
failure and technically demanding GPU implementation to meet the
runtime constraint [Newcombe et al. 2015; Zollhöfer et al. 2014].
This challenge motivates us to introduce a Neural Iterative Clos-
est Point (N-ICP) algorithm, where the goal is to leverage the prior
learned by a deep neural network to make an efficient and robust
prediction of the update direction Δ𝜽. We utilize a PointNet [Qi
et al. 2017] architecture to operate on the input point cloud P. In
addition to the coordinates of each point p, we also use the offset
r(p) = C(p, D(𝜽)) −p as a feature, which includes the essential
closest point information for solving the non-rigid ICP problem.
Inspired by the classical optimization paradigm, we also a provide
first-order derivative to the network. For the ease of computation,
we use the gradient g = J𝑇r of total loss with respect to the param-
eters, which can be automatically derived in most modern neural
network libraries [Paszke et al. 2019], or manually derived for better
computation efficiency. The formulation of the network M can be
written as Δ𝜽= M(P, r, g). The update 𝜽(𝑖+1) = 𝜽(𝑖) + Δ𝜽is then
performed for 𝑁= 3 times.
Weakly-Supervised Learning. We train the network in a weakly-
supervised manner without requiring the ground truth deformation
parameters 𝜽. Instead, we only use the clothing geometry P re-
constructed by Multi-View Stereo (MVS). Compared with P which
has missing parts due to occlusion from the sparse depth input, P


Faithful Full-Body Telepresence with Dynamic Clothing Driven by Sparse RGB-D Input
SA Conference Papers ’23, December 12–15, 2023, Sydney, NSW, Australia
includes the complete clothing geometry reconstructed from all
cameras in the capture studio, and is only used at training time for
supervision. Our loss function for training the network is written
as 𝐿N-ICP =
1
𝑁
Í𝑁
𝑖=1 𝐿ICP(𝜽(𝑖), P) plus regularization (see supple-
mentary document). In other words, the network is trained to find
an update to the parameters so that the deformed mesh can most
efficiently track the clothing surface for every ICP iteration.
Clothing Deformation Model. ICP-style methods require good
initialization to converge to the right local minimum. We observe
that the underlying body pose can provide coarse information about
body orientation and articulation as a good starting point. Thus we
adopt a hierarchical deformation model for dynamic loose clothing:
an outer layer of Linear Blend Skinning (LBS) W with respect to
body pose, and an inner layer of deformation graphs E [Sumner
et al. 2007]: D(𝜽) = W(E(M, 𝜽), 𝝆), where M is the template
shape of the clothing defined in the canonical space of LBS. The
underlying body pose 𝝆can be obtained from sparse RGB-D input
by vision-based keypoint detection followed by inverse kinematics
[Mehta et al. 2017], and it remains fixed during the N-ICP process.
In this formulation, 𝜽is defined as the rotation and translation of
deformation graph nodes, and we set its initialization to be the
rest pose 𝜽(0) = 0. Thanks to the global transformation and body
articulation encoded in 𝝆, D(𝜽(0)) = W(M, 𝝆) is close enough to
the target P for N-ICP to converge nicely. This formulation also
makes it efficient to perform per-frame tracking, preventing the
failure caused by error accumulation in sequential tracking. The
complete N-ICP process is illustrated in Fig. 3.
5
TEXEL-CONDITIONED CLOTHED AVATARS
The N-ICP algorithm in Sec. 4 can track large clothing dynamics,
providing a good starting point for rendering the clothed body ap-
pearance. However, the underlying deformation model is designed
to only capture large geometry deformations, and does not model
fine geometrical detail or appearance. Therefore, in the next step,
we develop a clothed avatar that can produce high-fidelity geome-
try and appearance when conditioned on both sparse RGB-D views
as well as the output from the previous N-ICP stage. The critical
question here is how to faithfully reconstruct the appearance detail
from the sparse driving views for dynamic clothing.
We build upon the texel-conditioned avatars from Drivable Vol-
umetric Avatars (DVA) [Remelli et al. 2022]. DVA takes in driving
signals of several RGB images mapped to texel-aligned features, as
opposed to conditioned primarily on pose [Bagautdinov et al. 2021],
and predicts geometry and view-dependent appearance that can
reproduce the full-body appearance. Formally, in DVA, the input
feature F𝑏
𝐼is the mean unwrapped image from multiple RGB driving
views based on the skinned mesh W𝑏𝝆= W(M𝑏, 𝝆) of the body
template M𝑏. This unwrapping process can be written as
F𝑏
𝐼= U({𝐼𝑐}, W𝑏
𝝆),
(2)
where U denotes the unwrapping operation and {𝐼𝑐} denotes the
set of driving images. The neural avatar A𝑏is a convolutional
encoder-decoder that takes in F𝑏
𝐼, viewpoint v and body pose 𝝆,
and predicts the geometry corrective 𝛿G𝑏and appearance T𝑏with
[𝛿G𝑏, T𝑏] = A𝑏(F𝑏
𝐼, v, 𝝆). The final geometry G𝑏is obtained by a
function G that applies 𝛿G𝑏on top of the LBS mesh W𝑏𝝆with a
pre-defined coordinate transformation
G𝑏= G(W𝑏
𝝆,𝛿G𝑏),
(3)
which is then used to render2 the output image together with the
view-conditioned appearance T𝑏.
Texel-Conditioned Clothing Avatars. The DVA baseline, however,
struggles to handle the large deformation of dynamic clothing.
The root of the problem is that the LBS mesh W𝑏𝝆, which encodes
only the skeleton-level motion, is too coarse to serve as the base
geometry for dynamic clothing. The large deviation of the LBS
mesh W𝑏𝝆from the true clothing surface has two consequences:
first, the unwrapping operation in Eq. (2) cannot effectively capture
the appearance detail; second, it places a heavy burden for the
network A𝑏to predict a large offset 𝛿G𝑏to update the geometry
in Eq. (3).
One of the key ideas of our clothed avatar model is to use the
non-rigid tracking result D = D(𝜽(𝑁)) from the final N-ICP it-
eration as the starting point. Because D is already well-aligned
with the clothing surface, we can obtain better texel-aligned fea-
tures with more appearance detail from the unwrapping operation
F𝐼= U({𝐼𝑐}, D). In order to further guide the estimation of the
geometry corrective using the driving depth images, we also pro-
vide a “depth offset” feature F𝐷as input. For each pixel [𝑥,𝑦] in
camera 𝑐with depth value 𝐷𝑐, we associate it with the rendered
depth 𝑑𝑐from the tracked geometry D at the same pixel location
and compute the offset as
𝑂𝑐[𝑥,𝑦] = R𝑐(𝑑𝑐[𝑥,𝑦] −𝐷𝑐[𝑥,𝑦])K−1
𝑐
𝑥
𝑦
1𝑇+ t𝑐,
(4)
where K𝑐is the camera projection matrix, and {R𝑐, t𝑐} are the rigid
transformation from each camera frame to a unified body root coor-
dinate frame. The depth offset feature is then a 3-channel average
tensor obtained by unwrapping {𝑂𝑐} for each driving camera 𝑐,
F𝐷= U({𝑂𝑐}, D). Thus, F𝐷can be regarded as the offset to be
corrected on top of D in order to match the sensor depth for each
UV location. Our clothing model takes in the texel-aligned features
F𝐼and F𝐷as well as the viewpoint v, and predicts the geometry
corrective 𝛿G and texture T with [𝛿G, T] = A(F𝐼, F𝐷, v). Finally,
the geometry G and texture T are used to render the output im-
age. Following [Xiang et al. 2021], the clothing is modelled as a
separate layer from the underlying body avatar. The body avatar
can be conditioned on body pose 𝝆or additionally on texel-aligned
features [Remelli et al. 2022]. To train the model, besides the stan-
dard image reconstruction loss and mesh regularization, we use a
part segmentation loss and an ID-MRF perceptual loss [Wang et al.
2018], which are detailed in the supplementary document.
2The geometry G and appearance T may take different forms depending on whether
the Mixture of Volumetric Primitive (MVP) [Lombardi et al. 2021] or mesh-texture
formulation [Lombardi et al. 2018] is adopted as the rendering model, but the high-
level concepts are similar and described here in a unified manner. The original DVA
method [Remelli et al. 2022] uses MVP, while we use mesh and texture.


SA Conference Papers ’23, December 12–15, 2023, Sydney, NSW, Australia
Xiang, D. et al
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
0.30
0.35
Runtime (s)
50
100
150
200
250
300
MSE (mm2)
N-ICP (Ours)
L-BFGS
Nonlinear CG
Levenberg-Marquardt
Figure 4: Comparison between our method and classical non-
rigid ICP with different types of optimization solvers. For
each method, we plot the runtime in seconds vs. the Mean
Squared Surface Error (MSE) in mm2 for the surface tracking
results. The square markers on the curves denote individual
steps in the optimization.
6
RESULTS
6.1
Capture Setup and Detail
We capture a total of three sets of garments: (1) a red dress with
a short full skirt; (2) a flared, short skirt3 in floral pattern with
a bottom ruffle; (3) a loose T-shirt and a long skirt. The training
data are captured in a multi-view capture studio equipped with
roughly 150 RGB cameras. This dense capture setup enables us to
use Multi-View Stereo (MVS) to reconstruct geometry, which can
be rasterized to depth and used as input to drive our avatars. We
split out a small segment of each sequence for testing purpose and
use the multi-view captured images as ground truth for evaluation.
To demonstrate the application of our method for telepresence,
we additionally capture the subjects with the same garments in a
novel environment with different background and illumination. It
is designed to be a simpler capture setup, where nine Kinect RGB-D
cameras are deployed, and we select three cameras as driving input
to our model. We also split the data in the novel environment for
fine-tuning and testing.
6.2
Evaluation of Neural Iterative Closest Point
We conduct an evaluation on the N-ICP algorithm using the dress
sequence. We use the ground truth from offline registration by non-
rigid ICP from [Xiang et al. 2022]. For this evaluation, we adopt the
same input as our full method: a point cloud fusing the depth maps
from three driving views. We report the evaluation metric of the
mean squared point-to-triangle distance for both directions from
prediction to ground-truth and from ground truth to prediction.
We compare N-ICP with classical optimization solvers, includ-
ing L-BFGS and nonlinear Conjugate Gradient with strong Wolfe
3The paired upper-body garments are tight and modelled in the body layer.
Table 1: Quantitative comparison with various baselines
and ablation studies using the loose T-shirt and long skirt
sequence captured in the multi-view studio. The metrics
are computed on the whole rendered images with a plain
background from two different views. We compare with
DVA [Remelli et al. 2022] and its two-layer variant, ENeRF
[Lin et al. 2022], KeypointNeRF [Mihajlovic et al. 2022], and
sensing-based baselines. Ablation studies are also included.
Methods
𝐿1 ↓
PSNR↑
SSIM↑
LPIPS↓
DVA
2.89
27.96
0.9218
0.0932
DVA (Two-layer)
2.90
28.03
0.9219
0.0912
ENeRF (Masked)
3.07
27.21
0.9130
0.0772
KeypointNeRF
3.14
27.42
0.9111
0.1123
Depth-based warping
3.22
26.94
0.9171
0.1111
+ LookinGood UNet
2.27
29.91
0.9382
0.0865
Ours w/o N-ICP
2.29
29.04
0.9299
0.0755
Ours w/o depth offset
2.19
29.35
0.9327
0.0728
Ours w/o part loss
2.11
29.63
0.9354
0.0724
Ours full
1.93
30.25
0.9404
0.0686
linear search implemented in PyTorch-Minimize [Feinman 2021],
and Levenberg-Marquart implemented in Theseus [Pineda et al.
2022]. All the methods are implemented in CUDA PyTorch with
analytically computed derivatives. The results are shown in Fig. 4.
Our method converges at a faster rate than the baseline methods,
including both the gradient-based methods (L-BFGS, CG and ours)
and the more complicated Jacobian-based Levenberg-Marquardt
method. For ablation studies on the formulation of our N-ICP net-
work, please refer to our supplementary document.
6.3
Full Method Evaluation
In this section, we present evaluation and comparison using high-
quality data from the dense multi-view capture studio. For com-
parison with most methods, we report quantitative results on the
the challenging loose T-shirt and long skirt sequence in in Tab. 1,
except for pose-driven clothed avatars because the tucked T-shirt is
extremely challenging to simulate in [Xiang et al. 2022]. Therefore
for this category we report results on the skirt with floral pattern
shown in Tab. 2.
Comparison w/ DVA [Remelli et al. 2022]. Although DVA adopts
the Mixture of Volumetric Primitive (MVP) [Lombardi et al. 2021]
formulation that can render any structure in theory, the spatial
arrangement of the primitives relies on the guidance of base body
mesh as initialization. Both the original method and its variant with
body and clothing layers are guided by LBS transformation, which
is too coarse to capture the motion of loose clothing. Qualitative
comparison is shown on the left of Fig. 7.
Comparison w/ NeRF-based methods. NeRF has been used to
model dynamically moving human appearance, but many of them
requires per-scene/frame fitting [Işık et al. 2023; Shao et al. 2023]
and are not directly applicable to our telepresence setting. We only


Faithful Full-Body Telepresence with Dynamic Clothing Driven by Sparse RGB-D Input
SA Conference Papers ’23, December 12–15, 2023, Sydney, NSW, Australia
TSDF fusion
from 3 views
Warped image
LookinGood
-style UNet
Ours
Figure 5: Comparison with basic sensing-based baselines.
Given the depth input from 3 views, we run TSDF fusion
[Curless and Levoy 1996; Dong et al. 2022] to obtain a proxy
geometry (first column), and then warp the driving RGB
images to the target view (second column). We train a UNet
following LookinGood [Martin-Brualla et al. 2018] to inpaint
the missing regions (third column).
compare our method with representative approaches of generaliz-
able NeRF that directly take in sparse image input. ENeRF [Lin et al.
2022] focuses on the setting of interpolating a target view from
several most nearby source views without human prior, but does
not perform well in our setting due to the difficulty in associating
views given wide camera baselines. KeypointNeRF [Mihajlovic et al.
2022] provides relative encoding of body keypoints as an additional
input feature for radiance prediction but cannot handle clothing
motion that does not closely follow the body motion. Qualitative
comparison is shown on the right side of Fig. 7.
Comparison w/ sensing-based baselines. Most sensing-based ap-
proaches [Dou et al. 2017; Martin-Brualla et al. 2018; Shao et al.
2022a; Yu et al. 2021b] are proprietary and tightly integrated with
their capture system without available open-source implementa-
tions. Therefore, we rather compare our method with baselines
that can be implemented with moderate effort, listed in the third
group of results in Tab. 1, including image warping based on TSDF
fusion and further applying a U-Net follwing the idea of Lookin-
Good [Martin-Brualla et al. 2018]. For detail please refer to our
supplementary document.
Ablation studies. We show ablation studies on several compo-
nents of our framework and the results are shown in Fig. 8 and the
fourth group of Tab. 1. First, the initial tracking by N-ICP provides
a basis for the whole framework to estimate the correct clothing
geometry and appearance. Without this component, the initializa-
tion by only body pose is too coarse and leads to obvious artifacts.
Clothing Codec Avatar 
[Xiang et al. 2021]
(L1 = 27.96)
Dressing Avatars 
[Xiang et al. 2022]
(L1 = 30.53)
Ours (L1 = 19.88)
3 driving input views 
Ground truth
Figure 6: Qualitative comparison with Clothing Codec
Avatars [Xiang et al. 2021] and Dressing Avatars [Xiang et al.
2022]. The results are shown on the top row; the input views
and ground truth are shown on the bottom. The 𝐿1 error in
the skirt region is reported beside the names of the methods.
Table 2: Quantitative comparison with Clothing Codec
Avatars [Xiang et al. 2021] and Dressing Avatars [Xiang et al.
2022] on the skirt sequence. The metrics are computed in the
skirt region.
Methods
𝐿1↓
PSNR↑
SSIM↑
LPIPS↓
Clothing CAs
25.46
17.81
0.2431
0.507
Dressing Avatars
27.95
17.01
0.1818
0.486
Ours
15.67
21.99
0.6527
0.203
Second, we demonstrate that the additional depth offset input to
the encoder-decoder allows our method to predict more accurate
overall clothing shape. Third, we verify that the part segmenta-
tion loss helps to produce correct body-clothing boundary. Last,
we compare the results with and without ID-MRF loss, which pre-
serves the high-frequency texture detail in our output when the
predicted geometry is not completely photometrically aligned with
the driving images.
Comparison w/ pose-driven avatars. A major motivation of our
framework is that the underlying body motion does not contain
enough information to fully determine the loose clothing states. We


SA Conference Papers ’23, December 12–15, 2023, Sydney, NSW, Australia
Xiang, D. et al
validate this intuition by comparison with Clothing Codec Avatars
[Xiang et al. 2021] and Dressing Avatars [Xiang et al. 2022] shown
in Fig. 6 and Tab. 2. Clothing Codec Avatars struggle to learn the
mapping from a sequence of body pose to large clothing dynamics.
Dressing Avatars produce clothing motion that looks realistic with
the help of physics-based simulation, but its output is not faithful
to the actual motion because of the lack of an efficient approach
for estimating underlying physical parameters for simulation. Our
method utilizes the driving signal from sparse RGB-D input to
achieve faithful clothing telepresence, which is verified by the low
error on the evaluation metrics in Tab. 2. Please refer to the supple-
mentary document for a more detailed discussion on the difference
in their formulation (e.g. supervised vs. self-supervised).
6.4
Results in the Novel Capture Environment
For the novel capture environment, we test our model in two differ-
ent scenarios: without and with fine-tuning, both shown in Fig. 9.
The first scenario refers to a direct application of the model trained
from the dense capture studio to the same subject but in the novel
environment. For this scenario, our model needs to handle the dif-
ference in the input RGB-D images between the training and testing
environments, such as illumination and sensor setup. Note that our
model is trained to be robust to these variations in the input and
preserve the appearance style from the original training data in our
output (see supplementary document), but with the unseen body
and clothing motion captured in the novel environment. This exper-
iment demonstrates the ability of our method to directly generalize
to a novel environment.
In the second scenario, we test our model after fine-tuning it
with the training data captured in the new environment. Note
that we use the same three Kinects for both driving input and
ground truth supervision. During fine-tuning, the output of our
model adapts to the new appearance caused by the illumination
and sensor specification in the environment, as well as the change
in body over time such as hair style. We test our model with a even
more aggressive change in the body-layer appearance from the
tank-top to the green capture suit in the second row of Fig. 9. The
fine-tuning step can be viewed as an option to further boost the
model output quality if time and computation budgets permit.
7
CONCLUSION
We presented a framework for building photorealistic full-body
avatars that can be driven by sparse RGB-D inputs and faithfully
reproduce the motion of loose clothing. Our method accurately
reconstructs challenging clothing appearance of the subjects, thus
tackling a major drawback of existing pose-driven avatars. As per
limitations, our model is still person- and garment-specific and can-
not handle clothing motion that falls far outside of the deformation
space of the deformation graph model, such as topology change.
Interesting future directions would be to extend our method to
multi-identity setting, and develop a formulation that can handle
more generic garment categories, e.g. with implicit representations.
REFERENCES
Timur Bagautdinov, Chenglei Wu, Tomas Simon, Fabian Prada, Takaaki Shiratori,
Shih-En Wei, Weipeng Xu, Yaser Sheikh, and Jason Saragih. 2021. Driving-signal
aware full-body avatars. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG) 40, 4 (2021).
Bharat Lal Bhatnagar, Cristian Sminchisescu, Christian Theobalt, and Gerard Pons-
Moll. 2020. Loopreg: Self-supervised learning of implicit surface correspondences,
pose and shape for 3d human mesh registration. Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems 33 (2020).
Federica Bogo, Angjoo Kanazawa, Christoph Lassner, Peter Gehler, Javier Romero, and
Michael J Black. 2016. Keep it SMPL: Automatic estimation of 3D human pose and
shape from a single image. In European Conference on Computer Vision.
Aljaz Bozic, Pablo Palafox, Michael Zollhöfer, Angela Dai, Justus Thies, and Matthias
Nießner. 2020. Neural non-rigid tracking. Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems 33 (2020).
Aljaz Bozic, Pablo Palafox, Michael Zollhofer, Justus Thies, Angela Dai, and Matthias
Nießner. 2021. Neural deformation graphs for globally-consistent non-rigid recon-
struction. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition.
Anpei Chen, Zexiang Xu, Fuqiang Zhao, Xiaoshuai Zhang, Fanbo Xiang, Jingyi Yu, and
Hao Su. 2021. Mvsnerf: Fast generalizable radiance field reconstruction from multi-
view stereo. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer
Vision.
Mingfei Chen, Jianfeng Zhang, Xiangyu Xu, Lijuan Liu, Yujun Cai, Jiashi Feng, and
Shuicheng Yan. 2022. Geometry-guided progressive nerf for generalizable and
efficient neural human rendering. In European Conference on Computer Vision.
Enric Corona, Gerard Pons-Moll, Guillem Alenyà, and Francesc Moreno-Noguer. 2022.
Learned vertex descent: a new direction for 3D human model fitting. In European
Conference on Computer Vision.
Brian Curless and Marc Levoy. 1996. A volumetric method for building complex models
from range images. In SIGGRAPH 1996 Conference Papers.
Wei Dong, Yixing Lao, Michael Kaess, and Vladlen Koltun. 2022. ASH: A modern
framework for parallel spatial hashing in 3D perception. IEEE transactions on
pattern analysis and machine intelligence (2022).
Mingsong Dou, Philip Davidson, Sean Ryan Fanello, Sameh Khamis, Adarsh Kowdle,
Christoph Rhemann, Vladimir Tankovich, and Shahram Izadi. 2017. Motion2fusion:
Real-time volumetric performance capture. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG)
36, 6 (2017).
Mingsong Dou, Sameh Khamis, Yury Degtyarev, Philip Davidson, Sean Ryan Fanello,
Adarsh Kowdle, Sergio Orts Escolano, Christoph Rhemann, David Kim, Jonathan
Taylor, et al. 2016. Fusion4d: Real-time performance capture of challenging scenes.
ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG) 35, 4 (2016).
Reuben Feinman. 2021. Pytorch-minimize: a library for numerical optimization with
autograd. https://github.com/rfeinman/pytorch-minimize
Wanquan Feng, Juyong Zhang, Hongrui Cai, Haofei Xu, Junhui Hou, and Hujun
Bao. 2021. Recurrent multi-view alignment network for unsupervised surface
registration. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition.
Qingzhe Gao, Yiming Wang, Libin Liu, Lingjie Liu, Christian Theobalt, and Baoquan
Chen. 2023. Neural novel actor: Learning a generalized animatable neural represen-
tation for human actors. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics
(2023).
Xiangjun Gao, Jiaolong Yang, Jongyoo Kim, Sida Peng, Zicheng Liu, and Xin Tong.
2022. MPS-NeRF: Generalizable 3D Human Rendering from Multiview Images.
IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence (2022).
Artur Grigorev, Karim Iskakov, Anastasia Ianina, Renat Bashirov, Ilya Zakharkin,
Alexander Vakhitov, and Victor Lempitsky. 2021. Stylepeople: A generative model
of fullbody human avatars. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition.
Kaiwen Guo, Feng Xu, Yangang Wang, Yebin Liu, and Qionghai Dai. 2015. Robust
non-rigid motion tracking and surface reconstruction using l0 regularization. In
Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision.
Marc Habermann, Lingjie Liu, Weipeng Xu, Michael Zollhoefer, Gerard Pons-Moll, and
Christian Theobalt. 2021. Real-time deep dynamic characters. ACM Transactions
on Graphics (TOG) 40, 4 (2021).
Mustafa Işık, Martin Rünz, Markos Georgopoulos, Taras Khakhulin, Jonathan Starck,
Lourdes Agapito, and Matthias Nießner. 2023. HumanRF: High-Fidelity Neural
Radiance Fields for Humans in Motion. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG) 42, 4
(2023).
Youngjoong Kwon, Dahun Kim, Duygu Ceylan, and Henry Fuchs. 2021. Neural human
performer: Learning generalizable radiance fields for human performance rendering.
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 34 (2021).
YoungJoong Kwon, Dahun Kim, Duygu Ceylan, and Henry Fuchs. 2023. Neural Image-
based Avatars: Generalizable Radiance Fields for Human Avatar Modeling. In
International Conference on Learning Representations.
Jason Lawrence, Danb Goldman, Supreeth Achar, Gregory Major Blascovich, Joseph G
Desloge, Tommy Fortes, Eric M Gomez, Sascha Häberling, Hugues Hoppe, Andy
Huibers, et al. 2021. Project starline: a high-fidelity telepresence system. ACM
Transactions on Graphics (TOG) 40, 6 (2021).
Hao Li, Robert W Sumner, and Mark Pauly. 2008. Global correspondence optimization
for non-rigid registration of depth scans. In Computer graphics forum, Vol. 27.
Ruilong Li, Julian Tanke, Minh Vo, Michael Zollhöfer, Jürgen Gall, Angjoo Kanazawa,
and Christoph Lassner. 2022. Tava: Template-free animatable volumetric actors. In


Faithful Full-Body Telepresence with Dynamic Clothing Driven by Sparse RGB-D Input
SA Conference Papers ’23, December 12–15, 2023, Sydney, NSW, Australia
European Conference on Computer Vision.
Yang Li, Aljaz Bozic, Tianwei Zhang, Yanli Ji, Tatsuya Harada, and Matthias Nießner.
2020. Learning to optimize non-rigid tracking. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition.
Haotong Lin, Sida Peng, Zhen Xu, Yunzhi Yan, Qing Shuai, Hujun Bao, and Xiaowei
Zhou. 2022. Efficient Neural Radiance Fields for Interactive Free-viewpoint Video.
In SIGGRAPH Asia 2022 Conference Papers.
Lingjie Liu, Marc Habermann, Viktor Rudnev, Kripasindhu Sarkar, Jiatao Gu, and
Christian Theobalt. 2021. Neural actor: Neural free-view synthesis of human actors
with pose control. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG) 40, 6 (2021).
Stephen Lombardi, Jason Saragih, Tomas Simon, and Yaser Sheikh. 2018. Deep ap-
pearance models for face rendering. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG) 37, 4
(2018).
Stephen Lombardi, Tomas Simon, Gabriel Schwartz, Michael Zollhoefer, Yaser Sheikh,
and Jason Saragih. 2021. Mixture of volumetric primitives for efficient neural
rendering. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG) 40, 4 (2021).
Ricardo Martin-Brualla, Rohit Pandey, Shuoran Yang, Pavel Pidlypenskyi, Jonathan
Taylor, Julien Valentin, Sameh Khamis, Philip Davidson, Anastasia Tkach, Peter
Lincoln, et al. 2018. LookinGood: enhancing performance capture with real-time
neural re-rendering. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG) 37, 6 (2018).
Dushyant Mehta, Srinath Sridhar, Oleksandr Sotnychenko, Helge Rhodin, Moham-
mad Shafiei, Hans-Peter Seidel, Weipeng Xu, Dan Casas, and Christian Theobalt.
2017. Vnect: Real-time 3d human pose estimation with a single rgb camera. ACM
Transactions on Graphics (TOG) 36, 4 (2017).
Marko Mihajlovic, Aayush Bansal, Michael Zollhoefer, Siyu Tang, and Shunsuke Saito.
2022. KeypointNeRF: Generalizing image-based volumetric avatars using relative
spatial encoding of keypoints. In European Conference on Computer Vision.
Ben Mildenhall, Pratul P Srinivasan, Matthew Tancik, Jonathan T Barron, Ravi Ra-
mamoorthi, and Ren Ng. 2020. Nerf: Representing scenes as neural radiance fields
for view synthesis. In European Conference on Computer Vision.
Richard A Newcombe, Dieter Fox, and Steven M Seitz. 2015. Dynamicfusion: Recon-
struction and tracking of non-rigid scenes in real-time. In Proceedings of the IEEE
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition.
Phong Nguyen-Ha, Nikolaos Sarafianos, Christoph Lassner, Janne Heikkilä, and Tony
Tung. 2022. Free-Viewpoint RGB-D Human Performance Capture and Rendering.
In European Conference on Computer Vision.
Adam Paszke, Sam Gross, Francisco Massa, Adam Lerer, James Bradbury, Gregory
Chanan, Trevor Killeen, Zeming Lin, Natalia Gimelshein, Luca Antiga, et al. 2019.
Pytorch: An imperative style, high-performance deep learning library. Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems 32 (2019).
Sida Peng, Junting Dong, Qianqian Wang, Shangzhan Zhang, Qing Shuai, Xiaowei
Zhou, and Hujun Bao. 2021a. Animatable neural radiance fields for modeling
dynamic human bodies. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on
Computer Vision.
Sida Peng, Yuanqing Zhang, Yinghao Xu, Qianqian Wang, Qing Shuai, Hujun Bao, and
Xiaowei Zhou. 2021b. Neural body: Implicit neural representations with structured
latent codes for novel view synthesis of dynamic humans. In Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition.
Luis Pineda, Taosha Fan, Maurizio Monge, Shobha Venkataraman, Paloma Sodhi,
Ricky TQ Chen, Joseph Ortiz, Daniel DeTone, Austin Wang, Stuart Anderson, et al.
2022. Theseus: A library for differentiable nonlinear optimization. Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems 35 (2022).
Charles Ruizhongtai Qi, Li Yi, Hao Su, and Leonidas J Guibas. 2017. Pointnet++: Deep
hierarchical feature learning on point sets in a metric space. Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems 30 (2017).
Amit Raj, Julian Tanke, James Hays, Minh Vo, Carsten Stoll, and Christoph Lassner.
2021. ANR: Articulated Neural Rendering for Virtual Avatars. In Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition.
Edoardo Remelli, Timur Bagautdinov, Shunsuke Saito, Chenglei Wu, Tomas Simon,
Shih-En Wei, Kaiwen Guo, Zhe Cao, Fabian Prada, Jason Saragih, et al. 2022. Driv-
able Volumetric Avatars using Texel-Aligned Features. In SIGGRAPH 2022 Confer-
ence Papers.
Ruizhi Shao, Liliang Chen, Zerong Zheng, Hongwen Zhang, Yuxiang Zhang, Han
Huang, Yandong Guo, and Yebin Liu. 2022a. FloRen: Real-time High-quality Hu-
man Performance Rendering via Appearance Flow Using Sparse RGB Cameras. In
SIGGRAPH Asia 2022 Conference Papers.
Ruizhi Shao, Hongwen Zhang, He Zhang, Mingjia Chen, Yan-Pei Cao, Tao Yu, and
Yebin Liu. 2022b. Doublefield: Bridging the neural surface and radiance fields for
high-fidelity human reconstruction and rendering. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition.
Ruizhi Shao, Zerong Zheng, Hanzhang Tu, Boning Liu, Hongwen Zhang, and Yebin Liu.
2023. Tensor4D: Efficient Neural 4D Decomposition for High-fidelity Dynamic Re-
construction and Rendering. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition.
Aliaksandra Shysheya, Egor Zakharov, Kara-Ali Aliev, Renat Bashirov, Egor Burkov,
Karim Iskakov, Aleksei Ivakhnenko, Yury Malkov, Igor Pasechnik, Dmitry Ulyanov,
et al. 2019. Textured neural avatars. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition.
Jie Song, Xu Chen, and Otmar Hilliges. 2020. Human body model fitting by learned
gradient descent. In European Conference on Computer Vision.
Shih-Yang Su, Frank Yu, Michael Zollhöfer, and Helge Rhodin. 2021. A-nerf: Articulated
neural radiance fields for learning human shape, appearance, and pose. Advances
in Neural Information Processing Systems 34 (2021).
Robert W Sumner, Johannes Schmid, and Mark Pauly. 2007. Embedded deformation
for shape manipulation. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG) 26, 3 (2007).
Xin Suo, Yuheng Jiang, Pei Lin, Yingliang Zhang, Minye Wu, Kaiwen Guo, and Lan Xu.
2021. Neuralhumanfvv: Real-time neural volumetric human performance rendering
using rgb cameras. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision
and pattern recognition.
Justus Thies, Michael Zollhöfer, and Matthias Nießner. 2019. Deferred neural rendering:
Image synthesis using neural textures. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG) 38, 4
(2019).
Qianqian Wang, Zhicheng Wang, Kyle Genova, Pratul P Srinivasan, Howard Zhou,
Jonathan T Barron, Ricardo Martin-Brualla, Noah Snavely, and Thomas Funkhouser.
2021. Ibrnet: Learning multi-view image-based rendering. In Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition.
Yi Wang, Xin Tao, Xiaojuan Qi, Xiaoyong Shen, and Jiaya Jia. 2018. Image inpainting
via generative multi-column convolutional neural networks. Advances in neural
information processing systems 31 (2018).
Donglai Xiang, Timur Bagautdinov, Tuur Stuyck, Fabian Prada, Javier Romero, Weipeng
Xu, Shunsuke Saito, Jingfan Guo, Breannan Smith, Takaaki Shiratori, et al. 2022.
Dressing Avatars: Deep Photorealistic Appearance for Physically Simulated Cloth-
ing. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG) 41, 6 (2022).
Donglai Xiang, Fabian Prada, Timur Bagautdinov, Weipeng Xu, Yuan Dong, He Wen,
Jessica Hodgins, and Chenglei Wu. 2021. Modeling clothing as a separate layer for
an animatable human avatar. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG) 40, 6 (2021).
Alex Yu, Vickie Ye, Matthew Tancik, and Angjoo Kanazawa. 2021a. pixelnerf: Neural
radiance fields from one or few images. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition.
Tao Yu, Zerong Zheng, Kaiwen Guo, Pengpeng Liu, Qionghai Dai, and Yebin Liu. 2021b.
Function4d: Real-time human volumetric capture from very sparse consumer rgbd
sensors. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition.
Fuqiang Zhao, Wei Yang, Jiakai Zhang, Pei Lin, Yingliang Zhang, Jingyi Yu, and Lan Xu.
2022. Humannerf: Efficiently generated human radiance field from sparse inputs. In
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition.
Zerong Zheng, Han Huang, Tao Yu, Hongwen Zhang, Yandong Guo, and Yebin Liu.
2022. Structured local radiance fields for human avatar modeling. In Proceedings of
the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition.
Michael Zollhöfer, Matthias Nießner, Shahram Izadi, Christoph Rehmann, Christopher
Zach, Matthew Fisher, Chenglei Wu, Andrew Fitzgibbon, Charles Loop, Christian
Theobalt, et al. 2014. Real-time non-rigid reconstruction using an RGB-D camera.
ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG) 33, 4 (2014).


SA Conference Papers ’23, December 12–15, 2023, Sydney, NSW, Australia
Xiang, D. et al
DVA [Remelli et al. 2022]
Two-Layer DVA
Ours
Ground truth
DVA [Remelli et al. 2022]
Ours
DVA [Remelli et al. 2022]
Ours
ENeRF (Masked)
[Lin et al. 2022]
KeypointNeRF
[Mihajlovic et al. 2022]
Ours
Ground truth
Figure 7: Left: comparison with Drivable Volumetric Avatars (DVA) [Remelli et al. 2022] and its two-layer variant. Right:
comparison with NeRF-based methods [Lin et al. 2022; Mihajlovic et al. 2022]. We mask out the black background of results in
ENeRF [Lin et al. 2022] with ground truth segmentation.
W/o N-ICP
Ours
Ground truth
Ours
Ground truth
W/o depth offset
Ours
Ground truth
W/o IDMRF loss
Ours
Ground truth
W/o segmentation loss
Figure 8: Ablation studies on components in our framework, including N-ICP, depth offset as input to the encoder-decoder,
part segmentation loss, and ID-MRF loss. Each result is shown in comparison to our full output and the ground truth.
