Title: Dressing avatars: Deep photorealistic appearance for physically simulated clothing

Dressing Avatars: Deep Photorealistic Appearance for Physically
Simulated Clothing
DONGLAI XIANG, Carnegie Mellon University, USA and Meta Reality Labs Research, USA
TIMUR BAGAUTDINOV, TUUR STUYCK, and FABIAN PRADA, Meta Reality Labs Research, USA
JAVIER ROMERO, WEIPENG XU, and SHUNSUKE SAITO, Meta Reality Labs Research, USA
JINGFAN GUO, University of Minnesota, USA
BREANNAN SMITH, TAKAAKI SHIRATORI, and YASER SHEIKH, Meta Reality Labs Research, USA
JESSICA HODGINS, Carnegie Mellon University, USA and FAIR, Meta AI, USA
CHENGLEI WU, Meta Reality Labs Research, USA
Photorealistic animation
with simulated clothing
Dressing a new avatar 
of the same actor
Dressing an avatar of 
a new actor
Dressing a new avatar 
with two garments
Fig. 1. We develop pose-driven full-body avatars with photorealistic clothing by applying neural rendering to physically simulated garments. On the left, we
show a skirt animation together with the body avatar built from the same captured sequence. We further retarget the skirt to a novel sequence with the same
actor and two new actors. On the right, we animate the skirt and a T-shirt together.
Despite recent progress in developing animatable full-body avatars, realistic
modeling of clothing - one of the core aspects of human self-expression -
remains an open challenge. State-of-the-art physical simulation methods
can generate realistically behaving clothing geometry at interactive rates.
Modeling photorealistic appearance, however, usually requires physically-
based rendering which is too expensive for interactive applications. On the
other hand, data-driven deep appearance models are capable of efficiently
Authors’ addresses: Donglai Xiang, Carnegie Mellon University, USA, Meta Reality
Labs Research, USA, donglaix@cs.cmu.edu; Timur Bagautdinov, timurb@fb.com; Tuur
Stuyck, tuur@fb.com; Fabian Prada, fabianprada@fb.com, Meta Reality Labs Research,
USA; Javier Romero, javierromero1@fb.com; Weipeng Xu, xuweipeng@fb.com; Shun-
suke Saito, shunsukesaito@fb.com, Meta Reality Labs Research, USA; Jingfan Guo,
guo00109@umn.edu, University of Minnesota, USA; Breannan Smith, breannan@fb.
com; Takaaki Shiratori, tshiratori@fb.com; Yaser Sheikh, yasers@fb.com, Meta Reality
Labs Research, USA; Jessica Hodgins, Carnegie Mellon University, USA, FAIR, Meta AI,
USA, jkh@cmu.edu; Chenglei Wu, chenglei@fb.com, Meta Reality Labs Research, USA.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s).
© 2022 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
0730-0301/2022/12-ART222
https://doi.org/10.1145/3550454.3555456
producing realistic appearance, but struggle at synthesizing geometry of
highly dynamic clothing and handling challenging body-clothing configura-
tions. To this end, we introduce pose-driven avatars with explicit modeling
of clothing that exhibit both photorealistic appearance learned from real-
world data and realistic clothing dynamics. The key idea is to introduce a
neural clothing appearance model that operates on top of explicit geome-
try: at training time we use high-fidelity tracking, whereas at animation
time we rely on physically simulated geometry. Our core contribution is a
physically-inspired appearance network, capable of generating photorealis-
tic appearance with view-dependent and dynamic shadowing effects even
for unseen body-clothing configurations. We conduct a thorough evaluation
of our model and demonstrate diverse animation results on several subjects
and different types of clothing. Unlike previous work on photorealistic full-
body avatars, our approach can produce much richer dynamics and more
realistic deformations even for many examples of loose clothing. We also
demonstrate that our formulation naturally allows clothing to be used with
avatars of different people while staying fully animatable, thus enabling, for
the first time, photorealistic avatars with novel clothing.
CCS Concepts: • Computing methodologies →Animation; Rendering;
Computer vision; Image-based rendering.
ACM Trans. Graph., Vol. 41, No. 6, Article 222. Publication date: December 2022.
arXiv:2206.15470v2  [cs.GR]  19 Sep 2022


222:2
•
Xiang, D. et al
Additional Key Words and Phrases: photorealistic avatars, cloth simulation,
neural rendering
ACM Reference Format:
Donglai Xiang, Timur Bagautdinov, Tuur Stuyck, Fabian Prada, Javier Romero,
Weipeng Xu, Shunsuke Saito, Jingfan Guo, Breannan Smith, Takaaki Shi-
ratori, Yaser Sheikh, Jessica Hodgins, and Chenglei Wu. 2022. Dressing
Avatars: Deep Photorealistic Appearance for Physically Simulated Cloth-
ing. ACM Trans. Graph. 41, 6, Article 222 (December 2022), 15 pages. https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3550454.3555456
1
INTRODUCTION
Photorealistic avatars are an essential component of authentic so-
cial telepresence, which is one of the key applications for AR/VR.
Recent work on full-body avatars [Bagautdinov et al. 2021; Haber-
mann et al. 2021b; Xiang et al. 2021] introduced animatable models
capable of producing photorealistic synthetic representations of hu-
mans from sparse signals such as body pose. However, synthesizing
realistic clothing still remains a challenge in avatar modeling. At the
same time, clothing is an essential form of self-expression, creating
a fundamental need for high-quality photorealistic animation of
clothing.
Existing work on avatars with animatable clothing can be cate-
gorized into two main streams. Cloth simulation creates realistic
clothing deformations with dynamics [Bouaziz et al. 2014; Bridson
et al. 2002; Ly et al. 2020; Macklin et al. 2016; Müller et al. 2007],
but only focuses on modeling geometry. The other line of the work
leverages real-world captures to build neural representations of
clothing geometry [Bertiche et al. 2021a] and may include appear-
ance [Habermann et al. 2021b; Liu et al. 2021; Xiang et al. 2021].
However, these systems usually damp the clothing dynamics, strug-
gle at generalizing to unseen poses and cannot handle collisions
well. Our key insight is that these two lines of work are actually
complementary to each other, and combining them can help achieve
the best of both worlds.
In this work, we propose to integrate physics-based cloth sim-
ulation into avatar modeling, so that the clothing on the avatar
can be animated photorealistically with the body, while achieving
high-quality dynamics, collision handling and capabilities to ani-
mate and render avatars with novel clothing. Our work builds upon
full-body Codec Avatars [Bagautdinov et al. 2021; Xiang et al. 2021],
which leverage a Variational Autoencoder (VAE) to model the ge-
ometry and appearance of a human body. In particular, we follow
the multi-layer formulation of [Xiang et al. 2021], but redesign the
clothing layer to integrate a physically-based simulator. Namely,
at the training stage, we learn the clothing appearance model us-
ing real-world data, by processing raw captures with our dynamic
clothing registration pipeline. At test time, we simulate the clothing
geometry on top of the underlying body model with appropriate
material parameters, and then apply the learned appearance model
to synthesize the final output.
Unfortunately, there are two major issues with a naive implemen-
tation of this pipeline. First, there exists a gap between the simulator
output and the tracking obtained from the real data. Estimating the
full set of physical parameters for body and clothing to faithfully
reproduce the clothed body configuration remains an unsolved prob-
lem, despite some progress in controlled settings [Miguel et al. 2012]
or in estimating only the body parameters [Guo et al. 2021]. There
are inevitable differences between the test-time simulation output
with manually selected parameters and the real-world clothing ge-
ometry used for training. Second, tracking clothing and underlying
body geometry at high accuracy is still a challenging problem, es-
pecially for loose clothing such as skirts and dresses. Both of these
issues, inconsistency between training and test scenarios and unreli-
able tracking, make learning a generalizable appearance model more
challenging. Thus, a good design of the appearance model should
avoid learning chance correlations between degenerated tracked
cloth geometry and specific appearance. To this end, we design the
model to be localized in terms of both architecture (U-Net [Ron-
neberger et al. 2015]) and input representation (normals). We also
take inspiration from physically-based rendering and decompose ap-
pearance into local diffuse components, view-dependent and global
illumination effects such as shadowing. In particular, we rely on an
unsupervised shadow network conditioned on the ambient occlu-
sion map explicitly computed from the body and clothing geometry,
so that the dynamic shadowing can be effectively modeled even for
a different underlying body model at test time.
Our approach generates physically realistic dynamics and pho-
torealistic appearance that are robust to diverse body motion with
complex body-clothing interactions. In addition, our formulation
allows the transfer of clothing between different individuals’ body
avatars as shown in Fig. 1, as well as virtual garment resizing in
Fig. 9. Our method opens up the possibility to dress photorealistic
avatars with novel garments. To summarize, our contributions are
as follows:
• We present animatable clothed human avatars with data-
driven photorealistic appearance and physically realistic cloth-
ing dynamics from simulation;
• We develop a deep clothing appearance model to produce pho-
torealistic clothing appearance that bridges the generalization
gap between the tracked clothing geometry for training and
the simulated clothing geometry at test time;
• Our animation system further enables transferring clothing
between different subjects as well as editing of garment size.
In our experiments, we evaluate the effectiveness of our approach
by animating multiple identities and clothing types, and provide a
comprehensive qualitative and quantitative comparison to existing
techniques.
2
RELATED WORK
Our goal in this work is to build photorealistic animatable avatars,
and we review work in this area in Sec. 2.1. To collect data for
training such avatars we use techniques for multi-view clothing
capture (Sec. 2.2). We leverage physics-based clothing animation
(Sec. 2.3) so that the animation output not only looks photorealistic
in appearance, but also natural in terms of physical dynamics.
2.1
Photorealistic Animatable Avatars
Models for dynamic full-body humans have been widely studied
because of their applications in the movie and gaming industries,
as well as virtual and augmented reality. Human avatars are usu-
ally built to be animatable with joint angles and skinning to allow
ACM Trans. Graph., Vol. 41, No. 6, Article 222. Publication date: December 2022.


Dressing Avatars: Deep Photorealistic Appearance for Physically Simulated Clothing
•
222:3
easy control of skeleton-level deformation. The classical approach
for modeling full-body appearance is to use a fixed texture associ-
ated with the template mesh [Carranza et al. 2003; de Aguiar et al.
2008; Starck and Hilton 2007], which enables the rendering of the
avatars by various graphics techniques such as direct shading or
ray tracing. However, it is impossible for simple rendering to ac-
count for the complicated appearance change under the variation
of viewpoint, deformation, material and lighting. Improved realism
has been achieved in classic methods with techniques related to
image-based warping [Chabert et al. 2006; Eisemann et al. 2008; Jain
et al. 2010; Volino et al. 2014], but they do not enable body reposing.
To achieve photorealistic rendering of animatable full-body human
appearance using classical techniques requires heavy computation
and the work of digital artists. In recent years there has been a lot
of interest in building photorealistic human avatars directly from
captured images in a data-driven manner. In these approaches, a
deep neural network takes as input a specific body configuration
(for example pose or mesh vertices), and outputs a predicted image
supervised by the ground truth capture from the same viewpoint
[Habermann et al. 2021a; Prokudin et al. 2021; Shysheya et al. 2019;
Zhi et al. 2020]. Data-driven approaches based on image translation
networks have also attacked this problem purely from a monocu-
lar 2D perspective, using rendered skeletons [Chan et al. 2019] or
2D body correspondences [Wang et al. 2018] as input. Some work
further utilizes recent breakthroughs in neural rendering, such as
Neural Radiance Fields [Kwon et al. 2021; Liu et al. 2021; Mildenhall
et al. 2020; Noguchi et al. 2021; Peng et al. 2021a,b; Su et al. 2021; Xu
et al. 2021; Zheng et al. 2022] and Deferred Neural Rendering [Grig-
orev et al. 2021; Raj et al. 2021; Thies et al. 2019]. Notably, full-body
Codec Avatars [Bagautdinov et al. 2021; Remelli et al. 2022; Xiang
et al. 2021] have been proposed as a promising approach to achiev-
ing photorealistic telepresence. Most of these approaches consider
clothing as rigidly attached to the human body, and the results are
limited to tight clothing such as T-shirts and pants. One exception is
the work by Habermann and colleagues [2021a], which can model
the deformation of loose clothing such as skirts and dresses in a
coarse-to-fine manner, but the predicted clothing deformation is
not physically realistic because the approach lacks explicit physics
priors.
2.2
Clothing Capture
Clothing capture has been explored as a source of geometry for
garment modeling. Previous work on this topic can be divided into
multi-view approaches and single-view approaches. Multi-view ap-
proaches use a multi-camera system or a 3D scanner to capture
and reconstruct the shape of the clothing. In order for the captured
clothing shape to be ready for use in downstream tasks, much ef-
fort has been devoted to registration, i.e, the representation of the
garment geometry by a consistent mesh topology in a temporal se-
quence [Bhatnagar et al. 2019; Bradley et al. 2008; Hong et al. 2021;
Pons-Moll et al. 2017]. Some work [Chen et al. 2021; Zhang et al.
2017] also estimates the underlying body pose and shape from the
clothed human reconstruction. In this paper, multi-view clothing
capture provides data to train our appearance modeling network.
Recent progress in computer vision makes it possible to recon-
struct clothing shape from a single-view input, which allows a
much simpler capture setup. One line of work treats the problem as
a monocular 3D shape regression task with explicit [Alldieck et al.
2019; Zheng et al. 2019] or implicit [Burov et al. 2021; Huang et al.
2020; Li et al. 2020; Saito et al. 2019, 2020; Xiu et al. 2022] shape
representation. Alternatively, optimization-based [Habermann et al.
2019; Xiang et al. 2020; Xu et al. 2018] or learning-based approaches
[Habermann et al. 2021b, 2020] are used to deform a personalized
template shape to match the input image. Most of these methods
only focus on estimating clothed body shape without photorealistic
texture (except [Li et al. 2020]). In addition, due to the fundamen-
tal difficulty of estimating depth from monocular RGB images, the
output accuracy of these approaches is deficient for high-quality
telepresence. Higher depth accuracy can be achieved in a monocu-
lar setup by using depth cameras [Chen et al. 2015; Yu et al. 2018],
although the quality of the results still does not match that of multi-
view systems.
A notable line of work aims to capture clothing with the assistance
of cloth simulation, both in the cases of monocular [Yang et al. 2017,
2018; Yu et al. 2019] and multiview input [Guo et al. 2021; Li et al.
2021a; Stoll et al. 2010]. However, these methods are still limited in
terms of output accuracy. Estimating precise physical parameters
solely from visual input is still a difficult problem.
2.3
Clothing Animation
Clothing is an integral part of human appearance, and thus the
animation of clothing has long been studied as an important com-
ponent in character animation. Physics-based simulation of cloth
has been established as a standard tool in the animation industry.
Various aspects of cloth simulation, including speed, robustness,
and collision detection and response, have been thoroughly studied
[Baraff and Witkin 1998; Bouaziz et al. 2014; Bridson et al. 2002; Li
et al. 2018, 2021b; Ly et al. 2020; Macklin et al. 2016; Müller et al.
2007]. In order to further improve animation efficiency, there have
been efforts to combine physics-based animation with data-driven
approaches [Kim et al. 2013; Wang et al. 2010]. A notable paradigm
is to use simulation to provide training data to supervise machine
learning models that predict clothing dynamics given body pose
and shape inputs [Bertiche et al. 2021b; Chentanez et al. 2020; Gun-
dogdu et al. 2019; Holden et al. 2019; Jin et al. 2020; Patel et al. 2020;
Pfaff et al. 2021; Santesteban et al. 2019, 2021; Vidaurre et al. 2020;
Zhang et al. 2021b]. The recent emergence of publicly available
3D captured clothing datasets [Ma et al. 2020; Tiwari et al. 2020]
has inspired work that directly learns clothing animation models
from such real-world data instead of simulation [Corona et al. 2021;
Ma et al. 2021a,b; Saito et al. 2021]. Additionally, the use of a self-
supervised physics-based loss [Bertiche et al. 2021a; Santesteban
et al. 2022] has been explored for the generation of 3D garment
deformations.
Although the aforementioned work can produce reasonable cloth-
ing shape deformation with dynamics, photorealistic appearance
modeling of the animation output is a non-trivial problem especially
for telepresence applications. Classic methods developed specialized
BRDF models [Yasuda et al. 1992], offline models for knitware like
ACM Trans. Graph., Vol. 41, No. 6, Article 222. Publication date: December 2022.


222:4
•
Xiang, D. et al
Input Pose
Base Body Avatar
Cloth Simulator
Body Texture
Body Geometry
Simulated Clothing Geometry
Clothing Appearance 
Model
(Sec. 5)
Clothing Texture
Output Image
Clothed Body 
Registration
(Sec. 4)
Rasterizer
Training Data
Ambient Occlusion
Fig. 2. Our animation pipeline includes three major modules: the base body avatar that predicts body geometry and texture given pose as input, the cloth
simulator that generates clothing deformation on top of the body geometry, and the clothing appearance model that predicts photorealistic clothing texture.
The appearance model is trained using real captured data with registered body and clothing geometry. The body avatar and clothing appearance model also
takes in ambient occlusion between the body and clothing geometry for dynamic shadowing effects. The geometry and texture pairs are then rasterized
together to produce the final output image.
the lumislice [Xu et al. 2001], or spatially-varying BRDFs which
use pattern geometry arrays to improve realism like [Daubert et al.
2001]. More recently, classic graphic methods evolved to generate
cloth fibers procedurally on the GPU in real-time, improving ren-
dering quality [Wu and Yuksel 2017] although still not reaching
photorealism. A more complete review of fabric rendering can be
found in [Castillo et al. 2019]. Among the learning-based methods,
Xiang and colleagues [Xiang et al. 2021] train a full-body avatar that
models clothing as a separate layer for photorealistic appearance
and temporal deformation, but they show only a single clothing style
(T-shirt) and degree of dynamics. Zhang and colleagues [Zhang et al.
2021a] propose a neural rendering approach that produces output
images from coarse garments generated by a temporal model. How-
ever, this work has several limitations. First, this work shows results
mostly in the synthetic domain. The output rendering is detailed but
limited in photorealism, because generating highly photorealistic
training images for the neural renderer is non-trivial. Second, the
method assumes input pairs of body-only images as background
and clothed body images as ground truth. In the real-world set-
ting, it is not clear how to obtain such paired data, especially the
body-only images. Third, the screen-space garment renderer can
have difficulty inferring the depth order between the body in the
background layer and the clothing in the foreground layer. By con-
trast, our method builds photorealistic avatars with highly dynamic
clothing using captured data in the real world. We track body and
clothing geometry and photometric correspondences at high quality
in the captured data, which facilitates the effective learning of the
appearance function. Our physically inspired clothing appearance
model operates in 3D space, and thus is free from the depth ordering
issue even with complex body-clothing interactions.
3
METHOD OVERVIEW
Our goal is to build pose-driven full-body avatars with dynamic
clothing and photorealistic appearance. Following [Bagautdinov
et al. 2021; Xiang et al. 2021], we train our avatars on multi-view
capture sequences of each subject wearing the clothing of interest.
At test time, the avatars are animated by a sparse driving signal of
skeleton motion (including facial keypoints if available), and can be
rendered in a novel camera viewpoint.
We aim to achieve high-fidelity animation that looks realistic both
in terms of appearance of the human subject and temporal clothing
dynamics. For this purpose, we develop an animation pipeline con-
sisting of three modules: an underlying body avatar model, physics-
based cloth simulation and a clothing appearance model. The un-
derlying body avatar takes as input the skeleton pose (including
face conditioning if animating expression) and outputs the body
geometry. Given a sequence of body geometry, we then use cloth
simulation [Stuyck 2018] to generate clothing geometry with natu-
ral and rich dynamics, physically consistent with the motion of the
underlying body. Finally, we apply the clothing appearance model to
the simulated geometry and generate photorealistic texture, which
takes into account not only the clothing geometry but also shadows
caused by the occlusion of the avatar body. The shadow cast by the
clothing on the body is also modeled similarly in the underlying
body avatar. Fig. 2 illustrates our overall pipeline.
Photorealistic full-body Codec Avatars [Bagautdinov et al. 2021;
Xiang et al. 2021] and physics-based cloth simulation [Stuyck 2018]
have been extensively explored in the existing literature. For these
two modules we mostly follow previous work and provide imple-
mentation detail in the supplementary document1. We find efficient
photorealistic appearance modeling of clothing to be a critical miss-
ing component in such a pipeline, and we tackle two major technical
challenges in order to build such a system. On the one hand, as ex-
plained in Sec. 5, we develop a deep clothing appearance model that
can efficiently generate highly photorealistic clothing texture with
dynamic view-dependent and shadowing effects. For the design
1Unless otherwise stated, we use a GPU-based XPBD [Macklin et al. 2016] cloth simu-
lation of a mass-spring system for its superior runtime performance, but our method is
not restricted to a specific choice of model or integration technique. Examples generated
by a different simulator [Ly et al. 2020] are provided in the supplementary document.
ACM Trans. Graph., Vol. 41, No. 6, Article 222. Publication date: December 2022.


Dressing Avatars: Deep Photorealistic Appearance for Physically Simulated Clothing
•
222:5
Segmented
Reconstruction
Boundary
Identiﬁcation
Boundary
Information
ounda
0
1
Biharmonic
Deformation
Boundary
Aligned Initialization
Non-rigid
ICP
Geometrically
Registered Mesh
eometrica
Unwrapping
UV Texture
Feature
Matching
& RANSAC
Sparse 
Correspondences
Densiﬁcation
Alignment
Initialization
Color ICP
Photometrically
Aligned Mesh
Geometric
Registration
(Sec 4.1.1)
Photometric
Alignment
(Sec 4.1.2)
+ ∆x
Fig. 3. Our full clothing registration method consists of two major steps: geometric registration and photometric alignment. The geometric registration step
aligns the garment surface of the segmented reconstruction with a template mesh. We rely on the boundary information for initialization and then minimize
the surface error using non-rigid ICP. In the photometric alignment step, we establish sparse correspondences between the salient region of the unwrapped
texture and a template texture. The sparse correspondences are then densified as a displacement for each vertex. This step is followed by color ICP which
outputs both a geometrically and photometrically aligned mesh in the template topology.
of the model, we focus on the generalization of the produced ap-
pearance, because the input geometry from the cloth simulator can
be different from the tracked clothing geometry used to train the
appearance model. On the other hand, in order to generate training
data for the appearance model, we extend the previous clothing
registration algorithm [Pons-Moll et al. 2017; Xiang et al. 2021] to
handle highly dynamic clothing types including a skirt and a dress.
In addition, we track photometric correspondences on the garments
by matching salient features, which are essential for the modeling
of highly textured clothing appearance. The clothing registration
step is described in Sec. 4.
4
CLOTHED BODY REGISTRATION
In this section, we introduce our data processing pipeline to obtain
training data for the clothing appearance model described in Sec. 5.
Because clothing registration is not the core contribution of this
paper, we focus on challenges posed by large clothing dynamics
and rich texture, which must be addressed to achieve high-fidelity
animation.
Our data capture setup is similar to previous work [Xiang et al.
2021]. The pipeline takes multi-view image sequences of a subject
as input, and outputs registered meshes of the garment and the
underlying body in two separate layers. We follow [Xiang et al.
2021] for raw geometry reconstruction and mesh segmentation into
body and clothing regions. We similarly estimate the kinematic
body pose and inner-layer body surface.
4.1
Dynamic Clothing Registration
The goal of clothing registration is to represent the clothing geom-
etry in a single mesh topology with consistent correspondences.
Our clothing registration method consists of two major steps, geo-
metric registration and photometric alignment. Fig. 3 illustrates the
overview of the clothing registration method.
4.1.1
Geometric Registration. In this step, we fit a clothing template
to the segmented clothing region of the reconstructed mesh using
the non-rigid Iterative Closest Point (ICP) algorithm. The non-rigid
ICP algorithm is similar to previous work [Pons-Moll et al. 2017;
Xiang et al. 2021] and thus we omit the details here.
In order to track loose and dynamic clothing types (e.g. skirt
and dress), it is important to provide good initialization for non-
rigid ICP. We observe that the clothing boundaries provide useful
information about the overall orientation and deformation of the
garment. Therefore, we start by estimating coarse boundary corre-
spondences. Utilizing the fact that each garment has a fixed number
of boundaries (for example, two for the skirt and four for the dress),
we associate each point on the the target clothing boundary with
the template mesh boundary by querying the nearest vertex in the
tracked inner-body surface. Given this coarse boundary correspon-
dence, we use Biharmonic Deformation Fields [Jacobson et al. 2010]
to solve for per-vertex deformations that satisfy the boundary align-
ment constraints while minimizing the interior distortion. We use
the output of the Biharmonic Deformation Fields as the initialization
for the non-rigid ICP algorithm.
4.1.2
Photometric Alignment. The geometric registration method in
[Pons-Moll et al. 2017; Xiang et al. 2021] aligns the clothing geometry
with a single template topology by minimizing the surface distance,
but does not explicitly solve for interior correspondences. In order to
effectively model clothing appearance, it is necessary to make sure
that each vertex in the template consistently tracks the same color
(essentially reflectance), which we call photometric correspondences
in this paper. We observe that the chunk-based inverse rendering
ACM Trans. Graph., Vol. 41, No. 6, Article 222. Publication date: December 2022.


222:6
•
Xiang, D. et al
Ambient Occlusion
Ambient Occlusion
Computation
Shadow Map
View-Independent
Texture
View-Conditioned
Texture
View-Independent
Network
View-Dependent
Network
Shadow
Network
ωo
Differentiable
Rasterizer
Rendering Output
Body Texture
Predicted 
Texture
w/ Shadow
Clothing Geometry
Normal Map
View Direction
Body Geometry
⊕
Fig. 4. The architecture of our deep clothing appearance model. We model local diffuse appearance with a view-independent network conditioned on surface
normals. The view-dependent network additionally takes in view direction and produces a view-conditioned offset. We explicitly model shadowing using a
shadow network that predicts a multiplicative shadow map given ambient occlusion between the body and clothing as input.
algorithm in [Xiang et al. 2021] can correct small deviations of the
photometric correspondences in the geometric registration step but
cannot recover from large errors in the initialization.
Here, we explicitly solve for photometric correspondences by
matching salient features in highly textured regions of the gar-
ments. For each frame in the sequence, we first unwrap a mean
texture from multi-view images to the UV space using the geomet-
rically aligned mesh from the previous step. Then, following [Bogo
et al. 2017], we use DeepMatching [Revaud et al. 2016] to establish
sparse correspondence pairs between the unwrapped texture and
the template texture. We also use RANSAC to prune erroneous cor-
respondences. The sparse correspondences are then densified to
each vertex by solving a Laplace’s equation, similar to Biharmonic
Deformation Fields in the previous step. Finally, we run color ICP
([Park et al. 2017], our own implementation) between the template
and the target mesh to photometrically align all the vertices.
5
DEEP DYNAMIC CLOTHING APPEARANCE MODEL
In this section, we introduce our clothing appearance model which is
the key technical component that enables our photorealistic clothing
animation system. Given clothing geometry as input, the goal of
the clothing appearance model is to generate clothing texture that
can be used for rasterization together with the input geometry to
produce photorealistic appearance.
We build a data-driven clothing appearance model in order to
learn complex photorealistic appearance from real captured image
sequences. Several factors need to be taken into account when
designing such a model. First, the appearance model is trained on
tracked geometry from the previous registration step, but at test
time, it takes simulated clothing geometry as input. Therefore, it
is essential for the model to bridge the generalization gap between
the training and testing data. Second, the generated texture should
include various aspects of photorealistic appearance, such as view-
dependent effects and dynamic shadowing. Third, for the sake of
efficiency, the model should only involve basic quantities that can be
easily derived from the clothing geometry, without computationally
expensive operations such as multi-bounce Monte-Carlo ray tracing.
5.1
Background: Rendering Equation
For a particular point x in the scene, the classical rendering equation
[Kajiya 1986] is written as
𝐿𝑜(x,𝜔𝑜) =
∫
Ω(n)
𝑓(x,𝜔𝑖,𝜔𝑜)𝐿𝑖(x,𝜔𝑖)(𝜔𝑖· n)𝑑𝜔𝑖,
(1)
where 𝜔𝑖,𝜔𝑜denotes the incident and outgoing direction, 𝐿𝑖, 𝐿𝑜
denotes the incident and output radiance, 𝑓denotes the BRDF func-
tion, and Ω denotes the hemisphere where the integral is computed,
determined by the normal direction n. Here the emission term is
omitted because clothing usually does not emit radiance.
A common strategy in physics-based rendering is to decompose
the appearance into a diffuse component and a specular component.
For the diffuse component, the BRDF function 𝑓is assumed to be a
constant per point. Then the diffuse radiance can be written as
𝐿𝑑(x) = 𝑓𝑑(x)
∫
Ω(n)
𝐿𝑖(𝜔𝑖)(𝜔𝑖· n)𝑑𝜔𝑖.
(2)
When assuming distant lighting and ignoring cast shadows, 𝐿𝑖can
be considered as an environment lighting map which represents the
consistent illumination condition for the whole captured sequence.
Under this circumstance, the integral term is only determined by
ACM Trans. Graph., Vol. 41, No. 6, Article 222. Publication date: December 2022.


Dressing Avatars: Deep Photorealistic Appearance for Physically Simulated Clothing
•
222:7
the normal direction n at each point, and thus
𝐿𝑑(x) = 𝑓𝑑(x)𝐸(n),
𝐸(n) =
∫
Ω(n)
𝐿𝑖(𝜔𝑖)(𝜔𝑖· n)𝑑𝜔𝑖.
(3)
Besides the local diffuse component, we need to additionally ac-
count for specular (view-dependent) effects and global illumination
effects especially cast shadows. The decomposition of appearance
into these three components has direct implication for the design
of network architecture described in the following section.
5.2
Model Formulation
From our capture setup we obtain a sequence of registered clothing
meshes {𝑉𝑖} and underlying body meshes {𝐵𝑖}, paired with multi-
view images 𝐼𝑐
𝑖, where 𝑖denotes the frame number and 𝑐denotes
the camera ID. We learn an appearance function 𝐹from geometry
𝑉𝑖, 𝐵𝑖and viewpoint 𝑣𝑐to a photorealistic UV texture. Fig. 4 shows
our clothing appearance model.
From the analysis in the previous section, the function 𝐹should
be able to model local diffuse (view-independent) appearance, view-
dependent effects and cast shadows. Under the assumption in Eq. 3,
the diffuse component at each location is determined by the normal
direction and diffuse albedo. Therefore, the view-independent part of
𝐹is conditioned on the normal direction n to encode the illumination
direction. We use 2D convolution with untied biases to encode the
spatially varying reflectance over the clothing. In our experiments,
we show that the normal direction n, as a local geometric property,
is more effective for generalization when used as input conditioning
than the absolute vertex positions 𝑉𝑖.
The view-dependent part of the network additionally takes the
viewpoint information 𝑣𝑐as input, and predicts an additive view-
dependent appearance offset. The viewpoint is represented by the
viewing direction vector in the local Tangent-Binormal-Normal
(TBN) coordinate at each position on the mesh.
For dynamic shadowing effects, previous work [Bagautdinov et al.
2021; Xiang et al. 2021] demonstrates that shadow maps predicted
by a shadow network from ambient occlusion can achieve a good
tradeoff between output quality and computation efficiency. There-
fore, we follow previous work to use a shadow network to predict a
quasi-shadow map, which is multiplied with the view-dependent
texture to obtain the final predicted texture. The input ambient oc-
clusion is computed by ray-mesh intersection with both body and
clothing geometry.
We use a 2D convolutional neural network (CNN) for the archi-
tecture of the appearance model 𝐹. All the inputs to the network
are converted to 2D feature maps according to a fixed UV mapping.
Instead of the autoencoder structure of Codec Avatars [Bagautdinov
et al. 2021; Xiang et al. 2021], we adopt the U-Net architecture [Ron-
neberger et al. 2015] in each of the three parts. This architecture
can focus on local information around each input location to learn
a generalizable appearance function.
Loss function. The appearance model produces a view-conditioned
photorealistic texture for the clothing given the input clothing and
underlying body geometry (used for ambient occlusion computa-
tion), denoted by 𝐹(𝑉𝑖, 𝐵𝑖, 𝑣𝑐). A differentiable rasterizer 𝑅is then
used to render body and clothing, denoted by 𝑅(𝑉𝑖, 𝐹(𝑉𝑖, 𝐵𝑖, 𝑣𝑐)).
We penalize the difference between the output rendering and the
Ours
Ground truth
Mean texture
Ours
Ground truth
W/o view-dependent model
Ours
Ground truth
W/o photometric tracking
(A)
(B)
(C)
Fig. 5. Illustration for ablation studies of the deep clothing appearance
model. We compare our full model with representative baselines. Regions
of particular interest are marked with black squares. (A) The mean-texture
rendering has baked-in shadows. (B) Without the view-dependent compo-
nent, brightness near the sihouette caused by Frensnel reflection cannot be
modeled. (C) The model trained on data without photometric alignment
produces blurry results.
raw captured image in the clothing region with the following differ-
entiable rendering loss
𝑙=
∑︁
𝑖,𝑐
∥(𝑅(𝑉𝑖, 𝐹(𝑉𝑖, 𝐵𝑖, 𝑣𝑐)) −𝐼𝑐
𝑖) ⊙𝑀𝑐
𝑖∥1,
(4)
where 𝑀𝑐
𝑖denotes the mask of clothing region in 𝐼𝑐
𝑖obtained from
image segmentation, and ⊙denotes element-wise multiplication. We
also rasterize the underlying tracked body geometry with a mean
unwrapped body texture together with the clothing for correct
body-clothing occlusion, which is omitted in Eq. 4 for simplicity.
6
RESULTS
In this section we present experimental results. We first introduce
the data capture setup in Sec. 6.1. Then we evaluate the clothing
appearance model presented in Sec. 6.2, followed by full pose-driven
animation results including body and clothing in Sec. 6.3. In Sec. 6.4,
we show an application of dressing photorealistic avatars, i.e. the
animation of clothing on top of novel subjects. Finally, in Sec. 6.5,
we present a runtime analysis of our method.
ACM Trans. Graph., Vol. 41, No. 6, Article 222. Publication date: December 2022.


222:8
•
Xiang, D. et al
Table 1. Quantitative evaluation of the clothing appearance model applied on tracked clothing geometry. Mean Squared Error (MSE, the lower the better) and
Structural Similarity Index Measure (SSIM, the higher the better) are reported. We conduct ablation studies on the effectiveness of each network component,
type of input conditioning, and photometric alignment for the training data. We also compare with similar modules in the previous work.
Method
MSE↓
SSIM↑
Network components: mean texture
316.48
0.67
Network components: mean texture + shadow
260.44
0.68
Network components: view-independent + shadow
189.29
0.73
Network components: view-independent + view-dependent
177.27
0.75
Our full model (network components: view-independent + view-dependent + shadow)
155.31
0.76
Geometry input conditioning: raw vertices
206.10
0.72
Geometry input conditioning: unposed normal
160.38
0.76
Geometry input conditioning: unposed vertices
161.08
0.76
Our full model (geometry input conditioning: normal)
155.31
0.76
W/o photometric alignment for training data (test on data w/o photometric alignment)
597.71
0.44
W/o photometric alignment for training data (test on data w/ photometric alignment)
483.73
0.46
Our full model (w/ photometric alignment for training data)
155.31
0.76
Previous method: Dynamic Neural Garments [Zhang et al. 2021a]
326.58
0.57
Previous method: Clothing Codec Avatars [Xiang et al. 2021] (texture only)
261.28
0.64
Previous method: Clothing Codec Avatars [Xiang et al. 2021] (geometry + texture)
379.87
0.58
Our full model
155.31
0.76
6.1
Data Capture Setup
We capture and process a total of four garments: two T-shirts worn
by two different male subjects, and a skirt and a dress worn by a
female subject. The four garments span different types of texture
patterns, including uniform color, a logo, and tiled floral texture, and
thus provide a good testbed for our deep clothing appearance model.
Following previous work [Xiang et al. 2021], we treat other clothing
worn along with the four garments of interest in the body layer,
including pants paired with the T-shirts and the tank top paired
with the skirt. These garments move closely together with the body,
and can be handled well in the same layer.
For the purpose of dressing avatars, we additionally capture three
base body avatars with minimal clothing (tight outfits with greenish
color in Fig. 8), including the subject from the skirt and dress capture
and two new subjects. In Sec. 6.4, we generate synthetic clothing
animation on these three base body avatars.
6.2
Evaluation of the Clothing Appearance Model
In this section, we evaluate the deep clothing appearance model,
including ablation studies and comparisons with previous work. We
leave out a segment of the captured skirt sequence as the test set,
and apply the clothing appearance model on the tracked clothing ge-
ometry. In this way, we can directly compute the difference between
the rendered clothing output and the original captured images as
ground truth. We report the error in the clothing area of the images
indicated by the segmentation masks.
6.2.1
Ablation studies: network components. In the first group of
experiments in Table 1, we validate the effectiveness of different
modules in our clothing appearance model. The simplest version
of the appearance model is to directly rasterize a single mean un-
wrapped texture for all the frames. This extremely cheap rendering
method can retain the pattern on the skirt, but no dynamic appear-
ance effects from illumination and shadowing are modeled, which is
exemplified by the unnatural baked-in shadows in Row (A) of Fig. 5.
We further add view-independent, view-dependent and shadow net-
works, which correspond to the three dynamic effects we attempt
to model. In Row (B) of Fig. 5, we compare the full method with
the network without view-dependent effects, which corresponds to
the “view-independent + shadow” case in Table 1. The most obvious
difference is the brightness pixel intensity near the silhouette of
the clothing in the full method, due to Fresnel reflection when the
incident angle is close to 90◦. The results in Table 1 verify that the
full model with all three modules performs the best.
6.2.2
Ablation studies: input conditioning. In Sec. 5.2, our appear-
ance model is conditioned on surface normals as geometry input.
In the second group of experiments in Table 1, we compare this
formulation with the one from [Xiang et al. 2021], where the net-
work takes the clothing vertex location after inverse Linear Blend
Skinning (LBS) as input, also called “unposed vertices”. We addition-
ally consider the other possibilities of using “raw vertices” (without
inverse LBS) and the surface normals of unposed vertices (“unposed
normal”). The quantitative results demonstrate the superiority of
our proposed formulation. We believe there are two reasons for this
performance improvement. First, the surface normals are a localized
representation, and thus allow better generalization of the model
than the absolute positions of vertices. Second, given the analysis in
Sec. 5.1, we know that the surface normals encode the direction of
incident illumination, thus following the principles of physics-based
rendering.
6.2.3
Ablation studies: photometric alignment. In the third group
of experiments, we verify the importance of photometric alignment
for highly textured clothing. As a comparison, we also train an
ACM Trans. Graph., Vol. 41, No. 6, Article 222. Publication date: December 2022.


Dressing Avatars: Deep Photorealistic Appearance for Physically Simulated Clothing
•
222:9
Ours
Ground truth
Clothing Codec Avatars
Ours
Ground truth
Dynamic Neural Garments
Fig. 6. Comparison between our clothing appearance model and similar
modules in previous methods. The Clothing Codec Avatars [Xiang et al.
2021] have difficulties modeling the highly dynamic region of the skirt. A
major issue with the screen-space garment renderer in Dynamic Neural
Garments [Zhang et al. 2021a] is the incorrect depth ordering between body
in the background layer and clothing in the foreground layer.
appearance model using clothing meshes generated by geometric
registration without photometric alignment. Both the quantitative
results in Table 1 and the qualitative evaluation in Row (C) of Fig. 5
show significant degradation when photometric alignment is re-
moved. The output images are very blurred when the model is
trained on such data. Different positions in the textured regions
of the clothing have a different reflectance (BRDF), so the tracked
photometric correspondences must be consistently aligned with the
captured images in order to learn the correct appearance function.
6.2.4
Comparison with previous methods. We compare the clothing
appearance model with similar modules from two previous methods:
Clothing Codec Avatars [Xiang et al. 2021] and Dynamic Neural
Garments [Zhang et al. 2021a]. For these experiments, we use the
same training data as our full model and only test the influence of
model choice.
Clothing Codec Avatars [Xiang et al. 2021] are deep neural net-
works with an autoencoder architecture. The encoder takes unposed
clothing geometry as input and outputs a latent code which is fed
to the decoder to generate both geometry and photorealistic view-
dependent texture, so the network can be used as clothing appear-
ance model as well2. We test the model in two ways: (1) rendering
tracked geometry (identical to input) with decoded texture (2) ren-
dering decoded geometry with decoded texture. As shown in the
last group of results in [Xiang et al. 2021] and in Fig. 6, our deep
appearance model achieves the lowest rendering errors, which we
attribute to three factors. First, the bottleneck structure of Clothing
Codec Avatars is essential for controlling the avatar with a low-
dimensional latent code but disadvantageous for learning detailed
appearance compared with the U-Net architecture of our appearance
model. This analysis is further supported by comparing Clothing
Codec Avatars with the appearance model with the same input con-
ditioning (“unposed vertices”) but a U-Net architecture among the
second group of experiments in Table 1. Second, Clothing Codec
Avatars are trained using a differentiable rendering loss on decoded
geometry and texture. However, the high frequency dynamics of the
skirt itself is hard for the network to learn, further jeopardizing the
modeling of texture, manifested by the blurry regions at the bottom
of the skirt in Fig. 6. Third, in the ablation studies, we verified that
the input conditioning of unposed vertices is not as good as the
surface normal used by our appearance model. All these factors
demonstrate that for our goal, it is advantageous to adopt the novel
formulation of the appearance model instead of that of Clothing
Codec Avatars.
Dynamic Neural Garments (DNG) [Zhang et al. 2021a] models
garment appearance with an improved version of Deferred Neural
Rendering [Thies et al. 2019] that is more temporally coherent. The
code for the garment renderer is released (not including the garment
geometry prediction part), so we train the renderer using the same
data as our appearance model for comparison. We generate the
background images by rasterizing tracked body geometry with the
fixed mean body texture, and composite it with the clothing region of
the original image as ground truth. The results are shown in Table 1
and Fig. 6. As a screen-space method, the garment renderer in DNG
has difficulty reasoning about the depth order between the body
and clothing layer when there are complex interactions between
the arms or legs and the garment. This limitation is acknowledged
in the original paper [Zhang et al. 2021a] and contributes to the
high quantitative error in Table 1 when skin color appears in the
clothing region of ground truth images.
6.3
Pose-Driven Animation
In this section, we present pose-driven animation results for the
four garments on top of the original body avatars that are cap-
tured together with the clothing. These results are generated by the
complete animation pipeline shown in Fig. 2. We make modest ef-
forts to select the physical parameters for the simulation to roughly
resemble the material behavior in the training sequence.
We compare the results with the output of the full method of
Clothing Codec Avatars [Xiang et al. 2021]. Some examples are
2In the original work, the encoder takes both geometry and texture as input. We adapt
the encoder input for this experiment. The Clothing Codec Avatars have the same
shadow network that takes ambient occlusion as input.
ACM Trans. Graph., Vol. 41, No. 6, Article 222. Publication date: December 2022.


222:10
•
Xiang, D. et al
[Xiang et al. 2021]
Ours
Reference Images
[Xiang et al. 2021]
Ours
Reference Images
Fig. 7. Pose-driven animation results in comparison with with [Xiang et al. 2021]. In each row we show one result generated by both methods and a held out
captured image for reference from two different views.
shown in Fig. 7 and full animation results are shown in the sup-
plementary video. The most obvious advantage of our method is
the temporal dynamics, especially for the loose clothing that does
not exactly follow the body motion. Although clothing is modeled
explicitly in a separate layer in [Xiang et al. 2021], the mapping from
body motion to clothing dynamics is a highly complex, temporally
dependent function that is not easy to learn well. Our approach
further separates the problem into dynamics and appearance to best
capture both these aspects.
6.4
Application: Dressing Avatars
Our formulation naturally enables garment animations on top of
base body avatars that are different from the original captured se-
quence. Because we model the clothing separately from the body
layer, we simply replace the base body avatar and apply the physics-
based simulation (with scaling if necessary) and clothing appearance
model in exactly the same way as the default pipeline. We show
dressed avatars of the same identity (wearing a tight capture suit)
and different identities. The animation results are shown in Fig. 8
and in the supplementary video.
ACM Trans. Graph., Vol. 41, No. 6, Article 222. Publication date: December 2022.
