Title: VASA-1: Lifelike Audio-Driven Talking Faces Generated in Real Time

VASA-1: Lifelike Audio-Driven Talking Faces
Generated in Real Time
Sicheng Xu∗
Microsoft Research Asia
sichengxu@microsoft.com
Guojun Chen∗
Microsoft Research Asia
guoch@microsoft.com
Yu-Xiao Guo∗
Microsoft Research Asia
yuxgu@microsoft.com
Jiaolong Yang∗†
Microsoft Research Asia
jiaoyan@microsoft.com
Chong Li
Microsoft Research Asia
chol@microsoft.com
Zhenyu Zang
Microsoft Research Asia
zhenyuzang@microsoft.com
Yizhong Zhang
Microsoft Research Asia
yizzhan@microsoft.com
Xin Tong
Microsoft Research Asia
xtong@microsoft.com
Baining Guo
Microsoft Research Asia
bainguo@microsoft.com
Abstract
We introduce VASA, a framework for generating lifelike talking faces with ap-
pealing visual affective skills (VAS) given a single static image and a speech
audio clip. Our premiere model, VASA-1, is capable of not only generating lip
movements that are exquisitely synchronized with the audio, but also produc-
ing a large spectrum of facial nuances and natural head motions that contribute
to the perception of authenticity and liveliness. The core innovations include a
diffusion-based holistic facial dynamics and head movement generation model
that works in a face latent space, and the development of such an expressive
and disentangled face latent space using videos. Through extensive experiments
including evaluation on a set of new metrics, we show that our method signifi-
cantly outperforms previous methods along various dimensions comprehensively.
Our method delivers high video quality with realistic facial and head dynam-
ics and also supports the online generation of 512×512 videos at up to 40 FPS
with negligible starting latency. It paves the way for real-time engagements with
lifelike avatars that emulate human conversational behaviors. Project webpage:
https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/research/project/vasa-1/
1
Introduction
In the realm of multimedia and communication, the human face is not just a visage but a dynamic
canvas, where every subtle movement and expression can articulate emotions, convey unspoken
messages, and foster empathetic connections. The emergence of AI-generated talking faces offers
a window into a future where technology amplifies the richness of human-human and human-AI
interactions. Such technology holds the promise of enriching digital communication [64, 35],
increasing accessibility for those with communicative impairments [29, 1], transforming education
methods with interactive AI tutoring [8, 31], and providing therapeutic support and social interaction
in healthcare [41, 33].
As one step towards achieving such capabilities, our work introduces VASA-1, a new method that
can produce audio-generated talking faces with a high level of realism and liveliness. Given a static
∗: Equal contributions. †: Corresponding author. See the contribution statement section for contributions.
38th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2024).
arXiv:2404.10667v2  [cs.CV]  31 Oct 2024


Figure 1: Given a single portrait image, a speech audio clip, and optionally a set of other control
signals, our approach produces a high-quality lifelike talking face video of 512× 512 resolution
at up to 40 FPS. The method is generic and robust, and the generated talking faces can faithfully
mimic human facial expressions and head movements, reaching a high level of realism and liveliness.
(All the photorealistic portrait images in this paper are virtual, non-existing identities generated by
[30, 5]. See our project page for the generated video samples with audios.)
face image of an arbitrary individual, alongside a speech audio clip from any person, our approach is
capable of generating a hyper-realistic talking face video efficiently. This video not only features lip
movements that are meticulously synchronized with the audio input but also exhibits a wide range of
natural, human-like facial dynamics and head movements.
Creating talking faces from audio has attracted significant attention in recent years with numerous
approaches proposed [77, 39, 75, 51, 25, 62, 63, 61, 71, 74, 36, 26]. However, existing techniques are
still far from achieving the authenticity of natural talking faces. Current research has predominantly
focused on the precision of lip synchronization with promising accuracy obtained [39, 61]. The
creation of expressive facial dynamics and the subtle nuances of lifelike facial behavior remain largely
neglected. This results in generated faces that seem rigid and unconvincing. Additionally, natural
head movements also play a vital role in enhancing the perception of realism. Although recent studies
have attempted to simulate realistic head motions [62, 71, 74], there remains a sizable gap between
the generated animations and the genuine human movement patterns.
Another important factor is the efficiency of generation, which plays a pivotal role in real-time
applications such as live communication. While image and video diffusion techniques have brought
remarkable advancements in talking face generation [20, 49, 55] as well as the broader video
generation field [6, 9], the substantial computation demands have limited their practicality for
interactive systems. A critical need exists for optimized algorithms that can bridge the gap between
high-quality video synthesis and the low-latency requirements of real-time applications.
Given the limitations of existing methods, this work develops an efficient yet powerful audio-
conditioned generative model that works in the latent space of head and facial movements. Different
from prior works, we train a Diffusion Transformer model on the latent space of holistic facial
dynamics as well as head movements. We consider all possible facial dynamics – including lip
motion, (non-lip) expression, eye gaze and blinking, among others – as a single latent variable and
model its probabilistic distribution in a unified manner. By contrast, existing methods often apply
separate models for different factors, even with interleaved regressive and generative formulations
for them [62, 76, 71, 60, 74]. Our holistic facial dynamics modeling, together with the jointly
learned head motion patterns, leads to the generation of a diverse array of lifelike and emotive talking
behaviors. Furthermore, we incorporate a set of optional conditioning signals such as main gaze
direction, head distance, and emotion offset into the learning process. This makes the generative
modeling of complex distribution more tractable and increases the generation controllability.
2


To achieve our goal, another challenge lies in constructing the latent space for the aforementioned
holistic facial dynamics and gathering the data for the diffusion model training. Beyond facial and
head movements, a human face image contains other factors such as identity and appearance. In this
work, we seek to build a proper latent space for human face using a large volume of face videos.
Our aim is for the face latent space to possess both a total state of disentanglement between facial
dynamics and other factors, as well as a high degree of expressiveness to model rich facial appearance
details and dynamic nuances. We base our method on the 3D-aided representation [64, 19] which
was proven to be expressive, and equip it with a collection of newly-designed loss functions critical
to effective disentanglement. Without the new designs we can never reach a high quality of talking
face generation, especially the liveliness with nuanced emotions. Trained on face videos in an
self-supervised or weakly-supervised manner, our encoder can produce well-disentangled factors
including 3D appearance, identity, head pose and holistic facial dynamics, and the decoder can
generate high quality faces following the given latent codes.
VASA-1 has collectively advanced the realism of lip-audio synchronization, facial dynamics, and
head movement to new heights. Coupled with high image generation quality and efficient running
speed, we achieved real-time talking faces that are realistic and lifelike. Through detailed evaluations,
we show that our method significantly outperforms existing methods on a set of metrics, including a
novel data-driven metric called Contrastive Audio and Pose Pretraining (CAPP) for measuring the
audio-pose alignment and a pose variation intensity score that is related to the vividness of head
motion. We believe VASA-1 brings us closer to a future where digital AI avatars can engage with us
in ways that are as natural and intuitive as interactions with real humans, demonstrating appealing
visual affective skills for more dynamic and empathetic information exchange.
2
Related Work
Disentangled face representation learning.
The representation of facial images through disen-
tangled variables has been extensively studied by previous works. Some methods utilize sparse
keypoints [44, 72] or 3D face models [42, 22, 73] to explicitly characterize facial dynamics and other
properties, but these can suffer from issues such as inaccurate reconstructions or limited expressive
capabilities. There are also many works dedicated to learning disentangled representations within a
latent space. A common approach involves separating faces into identity and non-identity compo-
nents, then recombining them across different frames, either in a 2D [11, 76, 34, 70, 37, 60, 54] or
3D context [64, 19, 18]. The main challenge faced by these methods is the effective disentanglement
of various factors while still achieving expressive representations of all static and dynamic facial
attributes, which is addressed in this work.
Audio-driven talking face generation.
Talking face video generation from audio inputs has been
a long-standing task in computer vision and graphics. Early works have focused on synthesizing
only the lips, achieved by mapping audio signals directly to lip movements while leaving other facial
attributes unchanged [53, 12, 39, 70, 13]. More recent efforts have expanded the scope to include a
broader array of facial expressions and head movements derived from audio inputs. For instance, the
method of [74] separates the generation targets into different categories, including lip-only 3DMM
coefficients, eye blinks, and head poses. [71] proposed to decompose lip and non-lip features on
the top of the expression latent from [76]. Both [74] and [71] regress lip-related representations
directly from audio features and model other attributes in a probabilistic manner. In contrast to these
approaches, our method generates comprehensive facial dynamics and head poses from audio along
with other control signals. This approach differs from the trend of further disentanglement, seeking
instead to create more holistic and integrated outputs.
Video generation.
Recent advances in generative models [10, 27, 48, 47] have led to significant
progress in video generation. Earlier video generation approaches [59, 56, 46] employed the adversar-
ial learning [24] framework, while more recent methods [69, 7, 23, 32, 4, 9] have leveraged diffusion
or auto-regressive models to capture diverse video distributions. Recently, several works concurrent to
us [55, 65] have adapted video diffusion techniques to audio-driven talking face generation, achieving
promising results despite the slow training and inference speeds. In contrast, our method is able to
not only generating high-quality results but also achieve real-time efficiency – a metric crucial to
efficiency-demanding applications such as live communication.
3


3
Method
Overall framework.
As illustrated in Fig. 1, our method takes a single face image, optional control
signals, and a speech audio clip to produce a realistic talking face video. Instead of generating video
frames directly, we generate holistic facial dynamics and head motion in the latent space conditioned
on audio and other signals. To achieve this, we start by constructing a face latent space and training the
face encoder and decoder. An expressive and disentangled face latent learning framework is crafted
and trained on real-life face videos. Then we train a simple yet powerful Diffusion Transformer to
model the motion distribution and generate the motion latent codes in the test time given audio and
other conditions.
3.1
Expressive and Disentangled Face Latent Space Construction
Given a corpus of unlabeled talking face videos, we aim to build a latent space for human face
with high degrees of disentanglement and expressiveness. The disentanglement enables effective
generative modeling of the human head and holistic facial behaviors on massive videos, irrespective
of the subject identities. It also enables disentangled factor control of the output which is desirable in
many applications. Existing methods fall short of either expressiveness [11, 42, 71, 60] or disentan-
glement [64, 19, 73] or both. The expressiveness of facial appearance and dynamic movements, on
the other hand, ensures that the decoder can output high quality videos with rich facial details and the
latent generator is able to capture nuanced facial dynamics.
To achieve this, we base our model on the 3D-aid face reenactment framework from [64, 19]. The
3D appearance feature volume can better characterize the appearance details in 3D compared to
2D feature maps. The explicit 3D feature warping is also powerful in modeling 3D head and facial
movements. Specifically, we decompose a facial image into a canonical 3D appearance volume
Vapp, an identity code zid, a 3D head pose zpose, and a facial dynamics code zdyn. Each of them
is extracted from a face image by an independent encoder, except that Vapp is constructed by first
extracting a posed 3D volume followed by rigid and non-rigid 3D warping to the canonical volume,
as done in [19]. A single decoder D takes these latent variables as input and reconstructs the face
image, where similar warping fields in the inverse direction are first applied to Vapp to get the posed
appearance volume. Readers are referred to [19] for more details of this architecture.
To learn the disentangled latent space, the core idea is to construct image reconstruction loss by
swapping latent variables between different images in videos. Our basic loss functions are adapted
from [19]. However, we identified the poor disentanglement between facial dynamics and head
pose using the original losses. The disentanglement between identity and motions is also imperfect.
Therefore, we introduce several additional losses crucial to achieve our goal. Inspired by [37], we
add a pairwise head pose and facial dynamics transfer loss to improve their disentanglement. Let Ii
and Ij be two frames randomly sampled from the same video. We extract their latent variables using
the encoders, and transfer Ii’s head pose onto Ij as ˆIj,zpose
i
= D(Vapp
j
, zid
j , zpose
i
, zdyn
j
) and Ij’s
facial motion onto Ii as ˆIi,zdyn
j
= D(Vapp
i
, zid
i , zpose
i
, zdyn
j
). The discrepancy loss lconsist between
ˆIj,zpose
i
and ˆIi,zdyn
j
is subsequently minimized. To reinforce the disentanglement between identity and
motions, we add a face identity similarity loss lcross_id for the cross-identity pose and facial motion
transfer results. Let Is and Id be the video frames of two different subjects, we can transfer the
motions of Id onto Is and obtain ˆIs,zpose
d
,zdyn
d
= D(Vapp
s
, zid
s , zpose
d
, zdyn
d
). Then, a cosine similarity
loss between the deep face identity features [16] extracted from Is and ˆIs,zpose
d
,zdyn
d
is applied. As
we’ll show in the experiments, our new loss function deigns are crucial to achieve an effective factor
disentanglement and facilitate the high-quality, lifelike talking face generation.
3.2
Holistic Facial Dynamics Generation with Diffusion Transformer
Given the constructed face latent space and trained encoders, we can extract the facial dynamics
and head movements from real-life talking face videos and train a generative model. Crucially, we
consider identity-agnostic holistic facial dynamics generation (HFDG), where our learned latent
codes represent all facial movements such as lip motion, (non-lip) expression, and eye gaze and
blinking. This is in contrast to existing methods that apply separate models for different factors
with interleaved regression and generative formulations [62, 76, 71, 60, 74]. Furthermore, previous
4


Figure 2: Our holistic facial dynamics and head pose generation framework with diffusion transformer.
methods often train on a limited number of identities [74, 68, 21] and cannot model the wide range
of motion patterns of different humans, especially given an expressive motion latent space.
In this work, we utilize diffusion models for audio-conditioned HFDG and train on massive talking
face videos from a large number of identities. In particular, we apply a transformer architecture [58,
38, 52] for our sequence generation task. Figure 2 shows an overview of our HFDG framework.
Formally, a motion sequence extracted from a video clip is defined as X = {[zpose
i
, zdyn
i
]}, i =
1, . . . , W. Given its accompanying audio clip a, we extract the synchronized audio features A =
{f audio
i
}, for which we use a pretrained feature extractor Wav2Vec2 [3].
Diffusion formulation.
Diffusion models define two Markov chains [27, 47, 48], the forward chain
progressively adds Gaussian noise to the target data, while the reverse chain iteratively restores
the raw signal from noise. Following the denoising score matching objective [48], we define the
simplified loss function as
Et∼U[1,T ], X0,C∼q(X0,C)(∥X0 −H(Xt, t, C)∥2),
(1)
where t denotes the time step, X0 = X is the raw motion latent sequence, and Xt is the noisy inputs
generated by the diffusion forward process q(Xt|Xt−1) = N(Xt; √1 −βtXt−1, βtI). H is our
transformer network which predicts the raw signal itself instead of noise. C is the condition signal,
to be described next.
Conditioning signals.
The primary condition signal for our audio-driven motion generation task is
the audio feature sequence A. We also incorporate several additional signals, which not only make
the generative modeling more tractable but also increase the generation controllability.
Specifically, we consider the main eye gaze direction g, head-to-camera distance d, and emotion
offset e. The main gaze direction, g = (θ, ϕ), is defined by a vector in spherical coordinates. It
specifies the focused direction of the generated talking face. We extract g for the training video
clips using [2] on each frame followed by a simple histogram-based clustering algorithm. The head
distance d is a normalized scalar controlling the distance between the face and the virtual camera,
which affects the face scale in the generated face video. We obtain this scale label for the training
videos using [17]. The emotion offset e modulates the depicted emotion on the talking face. Note that
emotion is often intrinsically linked to and can be largely inferred from audio; hence, e serves only as
a global offset added to enhance or moderately alter the emotion when required. It is not designed to
achieve a total emotion shift during inference or produce emotions incongruent with the input audio.
In practice, we use the averaged emotion coefficients extracted by [43] as our emotion signal.
In order to achieve a seamless transition between adjacent windows, we incorporate the last K
frames of the audio feature and generated motions from the previous window as the condition of the
current one. To summarize, our input condition can be denoted as C = [Xpre, Apre; A, g, d, e]. All
conditions are concatenated with noise along the temporal dimension as the input to the transformer.
Classifier-free guidance (CFG) [28].
In the training stage, we randomly drop each of the input
conditions. During inference, we apply
ˆX0 = (1 +
X
c∈C
λc) · H(Xt, t, C) −
X
c∈C
λc · H(Xt, t, C|c=∅)
(2)
5


where λc is the CFG scale for condition c. C|c=∅denotes that the condition c is replaced with ∅.
During training, we use a drop probability of 0.1 for each condition except for Xpre and Apre for
which we use 0.5. This is to ensure the model can well handle the first window with no preceding
audio and motions (i.e., set to ∅). We also randomly drop the last few frames of A to ensure robust
motion generation for audio sequences shorter than the window length.
3.3
Talking Face Video Generation
At inference time, given an arbitrary face image and an audio clip, we first extract the 3D appear-
ance volume Vapp and identity code zid using our trained face encoders. Then, we extract the
audio features, split them into segments of length W, and generate the head and facial motion
sequences {X = {[zpose
i
, zdyn
i
]}} one by one in a sliding-window manner using our trained diffusion
transformer H. The final video can be generated subsequently using our trained decoder.
4
Experiments
Implementation details.
For face latent space learning, we use the public VoxCeleb2 dataset from
[14] which contains talking face videos from about 6K subjects. We reprocess the dataset and discard
the clips with multiple individuals and those of low quality using the method of [50]. For motion latent
generation, we use an 8-layer transformer encoder with an embedding dim 512 and head number 8
as our diffusion network. The model is trained on VoxCeleb2 [14] and another high-resolution talk
video dataset collected by us, which contains about 3.5K subjects. In our default setup, the model
uses a forward-facing main gaze condition, an average head distance of all training videos, and an
empty emotion offset condition. The CFG parameters are set to λA = 0.5 and λg = 1.0, and 50
sampling steps are used. Our face latent model takes around 7 days of training on a 4 NVIDIA RTX
A6000 GPUs workstation, and the diffusion transformer takes around 3 days. The total data used for
training comprises approximately 500K clips, each lasting between 2 to 10 seconds. The parameter
counts of our 3D-aided face latent model and diffusion transformer model are about 200M and 29M
respectively.
Evaluation benchmarks.
We evaluate our method using two datasets. The first is a subset of
VoxCeleb2 [14]. We randomly selected 46 subjects from the test split of VoxCeleb2 and randomly
sampled 10 video clips for each subject, resulting in a total of 460 clips. These video clips are
about 5∼15 seconds long (80% are less than 10 seconds), with most of the content being interviews
and news reports. To further evaluate our method under long speech generation with a wider range
of vocal variations, we further collected 32 one-minute clips of 17 individuals. These videos are
predominantly sourced from online coaching sessions and educational lectures and the talking styles
are considerably more diverse than VoxCeleb2. We refer to this dataset as OneMin-32.
Inference speed.
Our method generates video frames of 512×512 size at 45fps in the offline batch
processing mode, and can support up to 40fps in the online streaming mode with a preceding latency
of only 170ms , evaluated on a desktop PC with a single NVIDIA RTX 4090 GPU.
4.1
Quantitative Evaluation
Evaluation metrics.
We use the following metrics for quantitative evaluation of our generated lip
movement, head pose and overall video quality, including a new data-driven audio-pose synchroniza-
tion metric trained in a way similar to CLIP [40]:
• Audio-lip synchronization. We use a pretrained audio-lip synchronization network, i.e., Sync-
Net [15], to assess the alignment of the input audio with the generated lip movements in videos.
Specifically, we compute the confidence score and feature distance as SC and SD respectively.
Higher SC and lower SD indicate better audio-lip synchronization quality in general.
• Audio-pose alignment. Measuring the alignment between the generated head poses and input
audio is not trivial and there are no well-established metrics. A few recent studies [74, 52]
employed the Beat Align Score [45] to evaluate audio-pose alignment. However, this metric is
not optimal because the concept of a “beat” in the context of natural speech and human head
motion is ambiguous. In this work, we introduce a new data-driven metric called Contrastive
Audio and Pose Pretraining (CAPP) score. Inspired by CLIP [40], we jointly train a pose
6


Table 1: Quantitative comparison with previous methods on two benchmarks.
VoxCeleb2
OneMin-32
SC ↑
SD ↓
CAPP↑
∆P
SC ↑
SD ↓
CAPP↑
∆P
FVD25 ↓
MakeItTalk
4.176
15.513
-0.051
0.210
-0.123
14.340
0.002
0.190
304.83
Audio2Head
6.172
8.470
0.246
0.260
5.992
8.211
0.205
0.239
209.77
SadTalker
5.843
8.813
0.441
0.275
5.501
8.850
0.383
0.252
214.51
Ours
8.841
6.312
0.468
0.304
7.957
6.635
0.465
0.316
105.88
Ours (10% data)
8.818
6.298
0.457
0.229
7.990
6.645
0.441
0.229
147.401
Real video
7.640
7.189
0.588
0.505
7.192
7.254
0.559
0.405
29.25
sequence encoder and an audio sequence encoder and predict whether the input pose sequence
and audio are paired. The audio encoder is initialized from a pretrained Wav2Vec2 network [3]
and the pose encoder is a randomly initialized 6-layer transformer network. The input window
size is 3 seconds. Our CAPP model is trained on 2K hours of real-life audio and pose sequences,
and demonstrates a robust capability to assess the degree of synchronization between audio
inputs and generate poses (see Sec. 4.3).
• Pose variation intensity. We further define a pose variation intensity score ∆P which is the
average of the pose angle differences between adjacent frames. Averaged over all generated
frames, ∆P provides an indication of the overall head motion intensity generated by a method.
• Video quality. Following previous video generation works [69, 46], we use the Fréchet Video
Distance (FVD) [57] to evaluate the generated video quality. We compute the FVD metric using
sequences of 25 consecutive frames, at resolution of 224×224.
Compared methods.
We compare our method with there existing audio-driven talking face genera-
tion methods: MakeItTalk [77], Audio2Head [62], and SadTalker [74].
Main results.
For each audio input, we generate a single video for deterministic approaches, i.e.,
MakeItTalk and Audio2Head. For SadTalker and our method, we sample three videos for each audio
and average the computed metrics. Since different pose representations are used by these methods,
we re-extract the head poses from the generated frames to compute the pose-related metrics (i.e.,
CAPP and ∆P). For the FVD metric, we use 2K 25-frame video clips of both the real videos and
generated ones. For reference purpose, we also report the evaluated metrics of real videos.
Table 1 presents the results on the VoxCeleb2 and OneMin-32 benchmarks. Note that we did not
evaluate the FVD on VoxCeleb2 as its video quality is varied and often low. On both benchmarks, our
method achieves the best results among all methods on all evaluated metrics. In terms of audio-lip
synchronization scores (SC and SD), our method outperforms all others by a wide margin. Note that
our method yields better scores than real videos, which is due to effect of the audio CFG (see Sec. 4.3).
Our generated poses are better aligned with the audios especially on the OneMin-32 benchmark, as
reflected by the CAPP scores. The head movements also exhibit the highest intensity according to
∆P, although there’s still a gap to the intensity of real videos. Our FVD score is significantly lower
than others, demonstrating the much higher video quality and realism of our results.
4.2
Qualitative Evaluation
Visual results.
Figure 1 presents some representative audio-driven talking face generation results
of our method. Visually inspected, our method can generate high-quality video frames with vivid
facial emotions. Moreover, it can generate human-like conversational behaviors, including sporadic
shifts in eye gaze during speech and contemplation, as well as the natural and variable rhythm of
eye blinking, among other nuances. We highly recommend that readers view our video results in the
supplementary material to fully perceive the capabilities and output quality of our method.
Generation controllability.
Figure 3 shows our generated results under different control signals
including main eye gaze, head distance, and emotion offset. Our model can well interpret these
signals and produce talking face results that closely adhere to these specified parameters.
Disentanglement of face latents.
Figure A.1 shows that when applying the same motion latent
sequences onto different subjects, our method effectively maintains both the distinct facial movements
and the unique facial identities. This indicates the efficacy of our method in disentangling identity
and motion. Figure A.2 further illustrates the effective disentanglement between head pose and facial
7


Figure 3: Generated talking faces under different control signals. Top row: results under different
main gaze direction condition (forward-facing, leftwards, rightwards, and upwards, respectively).
Middle row: results under different head distances (from far to near). Bottom row: results under
different emotion offset (neutral, happy, angry and surprised, respectively).
dynamics. By holding one aspect constant and changing the other, the resulting images faithfully
reflect the intended head and facial motions without interference.
Out-of-distribution generation.
Our method exhibits the capability to handle photo and audio
inputs that fall outside the training distribution, such as artistic photos, singing audio clips, and
non-English speech, as illustrated in Figure A.3.
Comparison with other methods.
Some visual examples from different methods are presented
in Figure A.4 A.5 A.6 A.7. Our method outperforms the others in terms of the precise audio-lip
synchronization and delivers much more vivid and natural facial dynamics and head movements.
4.3
Analysis and Ablation Study
CAPP metric.
We analyze the effectiveness of our proposed CAPP metric in measuring the
alignment between audio and head pose.
Table 2: CAPP under frame shifting
0
±1
±2
±3
±4
0.608
0.462
0.206
0.069
0.082
First, we study its sensitivity to temporal shifting by
manually introducing frame offsets to ground-truth
audio-pose pairs. We extract 3-second clip segments
from the VoxCeleb2 test split, yielding approximately
2.1K audio-pose pairs. The average CAPP score for these pairs is 0.608, as shown in Table 2. Manual
frame shifts lead to a rapid decline in CAPP scores, approaching zero for shifts larger than two frames.
This indicates a robust correlation between CAPP scores and audio-head pose alignment.
Table 3: CAPP under pose variation scaling
×0.2
×0.5
×1.0
×1.5
×3.0
0.368
0.584
0.608
0.587
0.505
We further investigate the effect of head movement
intensity on CAPP by manually scaling the pose dif-
ferences between consecutive frames using various
factors. Table 3 shows that altering movement inten-
sity negatively impacts the CAPP scores, demonstrating CAPP can assess the alignment of audio and
pose in terms of their intensity. However, this sensitivity to intensity appears less pronounced than
that to temporal misalignment.
8


Table 4: Ablation study of the audio and main gaze CFG scales as well as the sampling steps. Eg
denotes the average angular error of main gaze directions and Es is the average head distance error.
SC ↑
SD ↓
CAPP↑
∆P
FVD25 ↓
Eθg ↓
Es ↓
λA = 0.0, λg = 0.0
7.087
7.391
0.414
0.291
117.425
5.730
0.004
λA = 0.0, λg = 1.0
7.134
7.345
0.421
0.290
116.547
5.329
0.004
λA = 0.0, λg = 2.0
7.108
7.386
0.414
0.298
117.784
5.064
0.005
λA = 0.5, λg = 1.0
7.957
6.635
0.465
0.316
105.884
5.253
0.005
λA = 1.0, λg = 1.0
8.218
6.437
0.474
0.342
104.886
5.333
0.005
λA = 2.0, λg = 1.0
8.295
6.397
0.455
0.395
104.293
5.531
0.005
λA = 0.5, λg = 1.0 (steps= 10)
8.293
6.363
0.523
0.243
117.060
5.469
0.006
Real video
7.192
7.254
0.559
0.405
29.244
–
–
Figure 4: Ablation study on loss function lconsist for disentangled latent space learning. We generate
the results by only transferring the facial dynamics from source to target with head pose unchanged.
lconsist is crucial for decoupling subtle yet important facial dynamics from head pose.
CFG scales for diffusion model.
The CFG strategy [28] for diffusion models can attain a trade-off
between sample quality and diversity. Here we evaluate the choice of the CFG scales for the audio
and main gaze conditions (i.e., λA and λg in Eq. 2) in our model.
As shown in Table 4, as we increase the value of λg, the accuracy of gaze control improves. Increasing
the audio CFG scale to λA = 0.5 significantly enhances the performance of lip-audio alignment
(SC and SD), pose-audio alignment (CAPP), and pose variation intensity (∆P). With positive audio
CFG, the lip-audio alignment scores even surpass those evaluated on real videos (the results without
audio CFG, i.e., λA = 0, were slightly worse than or comparable to them). Moreover, the FVD score
shows a slight drop which indicates slightly better video quality.
Further increasing λA marginally improves lip-audio synchronization and reduces FVD25, but at the
cost of slightly degrading audio-pose synchronization and gaze controllability. In addition, observa-
tions from the generated videos indicate that a higher λA significantly amplifies mouth movements
for strong vocals and causes head pose jitter during rapid speech. For balanced performance and
overall generation quality, we set λA = 0.5 and λg = 1.0 as our standard configuration.
We also evaluated the influence of sampling steps on performance. Table 4 illustrates that decreasing
the steps from 50 to 10 improves audio-lip and audio-pose alignment while compromising pose
variation intensity and overall video quality. This step reduction could accelerate the inference process
by a factor of 5 for this latent motion generation module.
Training data scale.
To validate the data scale influence and compare our model with previous
methods at similar scales, we trained a diffusion model using only 10% of the data (i.e., 50K clips).
As shown in Table 1, the model trained on this reduced dataset demonstrates comparable audio-lip
9


and audio-pose synchronization to the full-dataset model, although the FVD and ∆p metrics are not
as good. Nonetheless, it still significantly outperforms previous methods across all metrics assessing
synchronization, motion intensity, and video quality. This indicates that our approach remains highly
effective even with much less data, and that increasing the dataset size enhances motion diversity.
Losses for latent space learning.
As described in Sec. 3.1, we introduce new losses lconsist and
lcross_id to improve the disentanglement of facial dynamics, head pose, and face identity. To validate
the effectiveness of lconsist, we transfer only facial dynamics from the source image to the target
while keeping the target’s pose unchanged. Figure 4 shows that without lconsist, the latent model
may struggle to replicate subtle facial dynamics such as side glances and lip asymmetries which are
oftentimes coupled with head poses (e.g., a skewed mouth may coincide with a tilted head, and the
gaze direction usually aligns with the head’s pose). Decoupling these subtle yet important dynamics
are challenging without explicit constraints from lconsist.
We also evaluate the face identity loss lcross_id for cross identity driving during training. We use all
108 subjects from the VoxCeleb2 test set for evaluation. For each subject, we chose the image that
is closest to a frontal view from the first frames of all its clips to serve as the target image. Then
we randomly selected 50 clips of other subjects as source videos, which leads to a total of 5,400
cross-reenactment clips. We calculate the facial identity preservation score by averaging the facial
identity feature cosine similarity over all generated frames of all subjects. With the introduced face
identity loss lcross_id, this identity preservation score of our results improved from 0.72 to 0.80.
5
Conclusion
In summary, our work presents an audio-driven talking face generation model that stands out for its
efficient generation of realistic lip synchronization, vivid facial expressions, and naturalistic head
movements from a single image and audio input. It significantly outperforms existing methods in
delivering video quality and performance efficiency, demonstrating promising visual affective skills
in the generated face videos. The technical cornerstone is an innovative holistic facial dynamics and
head movement generation model that works in an expressive and disentangled face latent space.
The advancements made by VASA-1 have the potential to reshape human-human and human-AI inter-
actions across various domains, including communication, education, and healthcare. The integration
of controllable conditioning signals further enhances the model’s adaptability for personalized user
experiences.
There are still several limitations with our method. Currently, it processes human regions only up
to the torso. Extending to the full upper body could offer additional capabilities. While utilizing
3D latent representations, the absence of a more explicit 3D face model such as [66, 67] may result
in artifacts like texture sticking due to the neural rendering. Additionally, our approach does not
account for non-rigid elements like hair and clothing, which could be addressed with a stronger video
prior. In the future, we also plan to incorporate more diverse talking styles and emotions to improve
expressiveness and control.
Contribution statement
Sicheng Xu, Guojun Chen, Yu-Xiao Guo were the core contributors to the implementation, training,
and experimentation of various algorithm modules, as well as the data processing and management.
Jiaolong Yang initiated the project idea, led the project, designed the overall framework, and pro-
vided detailed technical advice to each component. Chong Li, Zhengyu Zang and Yizhong Zhang
contributed to enhancing the system quality, conducting evaluations, and demonstrating results. Xin
Tong provided technical advice throughout the project and helped with project coordination. Baining
Guo offered strategic research direction guidance, scientific advising, and other project supports.
Paper written by Jiaolong Yang and Sicheng Xu.
Acknowledgments
We would like to thank our colleagues Zheng Zhang, Zhirong Wu, Shujie Liu, Dong Chen, Xu Tan,
Yu Deng, Lidong Zhou, and others for the valuable discussions and insightful suggestions for our
project.
10
