Title: Vrmm: A volumetric relightable morphable head model

VRMM: A Volumetric Relightable Morphable Head Model
Haotian Yang1 Mingwu Zheng1 Chongyang Ma1 Yu-Kun Lai2 Pengfei Wan1 Haibin Huang1∗
1Kuaishou Technology
2Cardiff University
Identity
Illumination
VRMM
Few-shot personalization
Figure 1: We present VRMM, a novel volumetric head prior with fully disentangled low-dimensional parametric space for
identity, expression, and illumination. Trained on dynamic expressions of hundreds of people captured in a LightStage with
controllable illumination, our VRMM enables high-quality animatable and relightable avatar reconstruction from few-shot
observations.
ABSTRACT
In this paper, we introduce the Volumetric Relightable Morphable
Model (VRMM), a novel volumetric and parametric facial prior
for 3D face modeling. While recent volumetric prior models offer
improvements over traditional methods like 3D Morphable Models
(3DMMs), they face challenges in model learning and personalized
reconstructions. Our VRMM overcomes these by employing a novel
training framework that efficiently disentangles and encodes latent
spaces of identity, expression, and lighting into low-dimensional
representations. This framework, designed with self-supervised
learning, significantly reduces the constraints for training data,
making it more feasible in practice. The learned VRMM offers
relighting capabilities and encompasses a comprehensive range
of expressions. We demonstrate the versatility and effectiveness
of VRMM through various applications like avatar generation,
facial reconstruction, and animation. Additionally, we address the
common issue of overfitting in generative volumetric models with a
novel prior-preserving personalization framework based on VRMM.
Such an approach enables high-quality 3D face reconstruction from
even a single portrait input. Our experiments showcase the potential
of VRMM to significantly enhance the field of 3D face modeling.
CCS CONCEPTS
• Computing methodologies →Volumetric models; Motion
capture; Reflectance modeling.
KEYWORDS
3D avatar creation; Facial animation; Neural rendering; View syn-
thesis; Relighting.
* Corresponding author.
1
INTRODUCTION
In this study, we explore 3D face modeling from a representation
learning perspective. The pursuit of realistic 3D facial representa-
tions is pivotal in both academic research and practical applications,
encompassing digital entertainment, telepresence, and biometric
identification. As a critical task in computer graphics and computer
vision, this area has garnered sustained attention. Early works like
3D Morphable Models (3DMMs) [Blanz and Vetter 1999; Booth et al.
2016; Cao et al. 2013; Jiang et al. 2019; Li et al. 2017; Paysan et al.
2009; Vlasic et al. 2005; Yang et al. 2020] have set a benchmark
due to their ability to encode faces in a parametric form. Their
parametric nature allows for the manipulation of face identity,
expressions and other attributes with relative ease, making 3DMMs
a powerful tool in the field. However, they often struggle to achieve
a truly lifelike fidelity, particularly in the subtleties of complex
head components such as hair and the interior of the mouth. To
overcome these limitations, research has shifted towards volumetric
models [Bühler et al. 2023; Cao et al. 2022; Hong et al. 2022; Wang
et al. 2022; Zhuang et al. 2022], which offer a more comprehensive
representation of facial structures and promise enhanced realism.
Despite the advancements offered by volumetric models, there
remains a significant gap in their capability. Our main observations
are two-fold: first of all, existing data-driven volumetric models
are not able to adequately model dynamic facial expressions or
to simulate the effects of variable lighting conditions on the face.
Existing animatable volumetric prior models either adopt super-
vised learning with decoupled input data of discrete identities
and expressions [Hong et al. 2022; Zhuang et al. 2022], or require
expensive and brittle preprocessing steps [Cao et al. 2022], which is
tedious and not practical to scale up. These drawbacks also limit the
further query of a continuous relightable model. Subsequently, there
arXiv:2402.04101v2  [cs.CV]  8 May 2024


Yang et al.
will be common overfitting issues when using generative models
for downstream reconstruction tasks [Abdal et al. 2019; Tewari et al.
2020; Tov et al. 2021; Zhu et al. 2020], which is also observed in
volumetric prior personalization [Bühler et al. 2023]. This drawback
is that due to the limited training data, the inversion of input facial
data into the volumetric modeling space is often problematic and
leading to reconstruction below satisfactory, which also deteriorates
the editability, i.e., relightable and animatable properties learned in
the prior model.
To bridge this gap, we propose VRMM, a novel volumetric and
parametric 3D face prior. VRMM is built upon volumetric primitives
linked to the UV space of a base mesh [Lombardi et al. 2021], and
adapt a physically-inspired appearance decoder [Yang et al. 2023]
for relighting . It uses multi-identity mapping and an expression
encoder to handle various expressions and lighting conditions.
By explicitly encoding identity, expression and lighting into low-
dimensional representations, VRMM learns to disentangle the asso-
ciated latent spaces and can be trained in a self-supervised manner.
Our design of VRMM effectively reduces the constraints of training
data required by previous volumetric models and enables training
with more flexible data collections. In practice, the training of our
VRMM is based on a dataset comprising high-quality multi-view
image sequences of fewer than 300 individuals. These individuals
were captured exhibiting dynamic expressions within a LightStage
under controllable lighting conditions.
We further adapt our VRMM model for various fitting and re-
construction tasks. As discussed above, fine-tuning is necessary for
volumetric prior models to overcome the inversion issue [Bühler
et al. 2023; Cao et al. 2022; Wang et al. 2022] at the cost of over-
fitting. Hence we propose a prior-preserving framework for model
fitting. Specifically, we use an identity related regularization term
to balance the VRMM’s generation capacity and fitting accuracy.
Our specifically designed framework allows high-quality avatars
that are animatable and relightable to be created from few-shot
captures, significantly outperforming existing baselines.
In summary, our contributions are:
• We present VRMM, the first 3D volumetric facial prior that is
both continuously relightable and encompasses full range of
expressions to the best of our knowledge.
• We propose a novel training framework to learn the disentangled
parametric space of expression, identity and lighting for VRMM
from dynamic multi-view image sequences captured under con-
trollable light conditions.
• We propose a novel personalization method that is elaborately de-
signed to keep the animatable and relightable properties provided
by the prior, which enables high-fidelity avatar reconstruction
from several or even one image.
• Extensive experiments demonstrate that VRMM can be used in
various applications and outperforms previous methods.
2
RELATED WORK
In this section, we review closely related parametric 3D face models
based on both traditional mesh-based representation and volumetric
representation. We also discuss related methods of neural avatar
reconstruction.
Parametric head models. Accurate modeling of 3D head geometry
and appearance remains a significant challenge in both computer
graphics and computer vision. Among various methodologies, 3D
Morphable Models (3DMMs) emerged as a pioneering and system-
atic approach. Originally introduced by Blanz and Vetter [1999] and
later evolved into multi-linear models [Vlasic et al. 2005], 3DMMs
have been fundamental in modeling facial meshes and textures.
They serve as a universal facial prior in diverse applications like
face reconstruction and tracking from single-view images [Dou
et al. 2017b; Thies et al. 2016; Zhu et al. 2017]. However, 3DMMs
are limited by their linear and mesh-based nature, restricting the
scope of shape and appearance modeling.
Recent advances in deep learning have sought to address these
limitations, employing nonlinear methods for more refined facial
modeling [Bagautdinov et al. 2018; Ploumpis et al. 2020; Tran
and Liu 2018, 2019; Zhang et al. 2022; Zheng et al. 2022]. Despite
these improvements, surface-based representations, including both
meshes and implicit functions, still struggle to capture the complete
complexity of human head components such as teeth, facial hair,
eyes, and so on.
A significant shift in this domain is evident with the advent of
neural volumetric rendering, particularly NeRF (Neural Radiance
Field)-based techniques [Kerbl et al. 2023; Mildenhall et al. 2020;
Müller et al. 2022]. These methods holistically represent the 3D
objects, achieving both photorealism and 3D consistency from
multi-view images. Early attempts in volumetric head modeling
primarily focused on the geometry and appearance of a single
scene or identity [Lombardi et al. 2019, 2021; Ma et al. 2021; Yang
et al. 2023]. More recent work extends to multi-identity scenarios
through generative modeling [Bühler et al. 2023; Cao et al. 2022;
Hong et al. 2022; Wang et al. 2022; Zhuang et al. 2022]. For instance,
MoRF [Wang et al. 2022] employs an auto-decoder framework [Park
et al. 2019] to learn a conditional NeRF in a polarization-based studio
setup, separating the diffuse and specular shading components.
However, its applications are confined to studio environments and
lack generalization to in-the-wild scenes. Preface [Bühler et al. 2023]
expands on this, allowing high-resolution rendering in more casual
settings. Nonetheless, both MoRF and Preface are limited to static
head models, missing out on dynamic and relightable features which
are crucial for real-world applications. MoFaNeRF [Zhuang et al.
2022] and Cao et al. [2022] integrate dynamic expressions, enabling
the creation of animatable avatars. HeadNeRF [Hong et al. 2022] also
introduces basic relighting capabilities but is constrained to certain
lighting conditions. Currently, no previous method achieves full
creation of expressive, dynamically relightable heads under various
physically accurate lighting conditions. For a more comprehensive
comparison, please refer to Tab. 1. To our knowledge, VRMM is the
first model to achieve this, presenting a significant advancement in
the field of volumetric and relightable morphable head models.
Avatar reconstruction. The field of 3D face reconstruction and per-
formance capture has seen extensive research efforts over decades,
leading to the development of sophisticated 3D scanning systems.
These systems, focusing on static geometry reconstruction [Beeler
et al. 2010; Ghosh et al. 2011] and dynamic performance capture
[Beeler et al. 2011; Bradley et al. 2010; Collet et al. 2015; Dou et al.
2017a; Guo et al. 2019; Huang et al. 2011], predominantly employ


VRMM: A Volumetric Relightable Morphable Head Model
Table 1: Comparison of different methods for volumetric
head models across four aspects. VRMM is the only
model that enables a physically relightable and animatable
model with real-time rendering capabilities. Single-stage
reconstruction indicates that the morphable model does not
require reconstructed meshes or other 3DMMs when fitting
new data. (* Zhuang et al. [2022] and Hong et al. [2022] only
support limited expressions. Hong et al. [2022] is limited to
relighting under preset lighting conditions.)
Method
Animatable
Relightable
Single-stage
reconstruction
Real-time
rendering
Zhuang et al. [2022]
✓*
✗
✓
✗
Cao et al. [2022]
✓
✗
✗
✓
Hong et al. [2022]
✓*
✓*
✗
✓
Wang et al. [2022]
✗
✗
✓
✗
Buhler et al. [2023]
✗
✗
✓
✗
VRMM (Ours)
✓
✓
✓
✓
multi-view stereo (MVS) and structured light techniques for point
cloud acquisition. Subsequent steps involve estimating deforming
geometry to maintain temporal mesh consistency. However, such
tracking process often requires labor-intensive MVS reconstruction
for numerous frames and complex optical-flow optimization, while
real-time face tracking algorithms still fall short in accuracy.
Another vital component for creating realistic and relightable
avatars is the estimation of light interaction with the subject, par-
ticularly the reflectance properties. Traditional methods typically
model this interaction using bidirectional reflectance distribution
functions (BRDF) [Schlick 1994], determined by observing appear-
ance changes under various lighting conditions. Active lighting
approaches, such as those using LightStage setups [Debevec et al.
2000], involve data collection with complex arrangements like one-
light-at-a-time (OLAT) capture or polarized and color gradient
illuminations [Fyffe and Debevec 2015; Ghosh et al. 2011; Guo et al.
2019; Ma et al. 2007; Zhang et al. 2022]. Conversely, passive capture
methods [Li et al. 2022; Riviere et al. 2020; Zheng et al. 2023a]
significantly reduce the need for elaborate setups.
Despite these advancements, these methods still require high
hardware costs and considerable effort for data acquisition. The
advent of deep learning and large-scale datasets has enabled the
estimation of geometry and reflectance properties from single-view
input [Caselles et al. 2023; Lattas et al. 2020, 2021; Li et al. 2020b,a;
Papantoniou et al. 2023; Yamaguchi et al. 2018]. Nevertheless, these
methods typically focus only on skin regions, as the complexity
of hair and eye structures makes single-view inverse rendering
difficult. Moreover, most reconstructed results are static and not
animatable. Recent endeavors have focused on creating dynamic
avatars from monocular videos [Chen and Liu 2022; Gao et al. 2022;
Zheng et al. 2023b; Zielonka et al. 2023] or RGB-D inputs [Cao et al.
2022]. However, these methods typically fall short in providing
relightable attributes, or their quality is constrained by the training
video’s limitations, due to the lack of a powerful prior model. The
challenge remains to photorealistically model complete human
heads, considering all the highly complex and diverse compositions
of material, geometry, and expression.
To our best knowledge, our VRMM is the first capable of re-
constructing high-quality animatable and relightable volumetric
avatars from few-shot captures, representing a significant leap in
the field of 3D avatar reconstruction.
3
METHOD
In this section, we first introduce the training framework of our
volumetric relightable morphable model using high-quality data
captured in the studio, as shown in Figure 2. Then we present a
specially designed pipeline to fit the learned VRMM model to in
the studio or in-the-wild captures for consumer-grade authentic
3D avatar reconstruction.
3.1
Preliminaries
Our VRMM is built upon the representation of Mixture of Volumet-
ric Primitives (MVP) [Lombardi et al. 2021], which represents the
scene as volumetric primitives attached to the UV space of a base
mesh. We adopt the physically-inspired appearance decoder [Yang
et al. 2023] to support relighting, where the lighting condition 𝑙
is represented as the incoming light field of 𝑁𝑙densely sampled
directions on the sphere. Specifically, given the expression code
𝑧𝑒, the view direction d, and the lighting condition 𝑙, a series of
decoders D𝑀𝑉𝑃predict the position and color of 𝑁𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑚volumetric
primitives for rendering:
{v, 𝑅𝑝,𝑡𝑝,𝑠𝑝,𝑉𝛼,𝑉𝑟𝑔𝑏} = D𝑀𝑉𝑃(𝑧𝑒, d,𝑙),
(1)
where v is the position of the vertices of the base mesh, {𝑅𝑝,𝑡𝑝,𝑠𝑝}
are the rotation, translation and non-uniform scaling of 𝑁𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑚
primitives relative to the base mesh, 𝑉𝛼and 𝑉𝑟𝑔𝑏are the opacity
and color of each voxel in the primitives, respectively. The color of
the rendered image 𝐼𝑟𝑔𝑏at pixel 𝑝can be obtained by integrating
the radiance of the voxels along the direction d𝑝of the ray starting
from the position o𝑝of pixel in 3D space:
𝐼𝑟𝑔𝑏(𝑝) =
∫𝑡max
𝑡min
𝑉𝑟𝑔𝑏(o𝑝+ 𝑡d𝑝)𝑑𝑇(𝑝,𝑡)
𝑑𝑡
,
(2)
𝑇(𝑝,𝑡) = min

1,
∫𝑡
𝑡min
𝑉𝛼
 o𝑝+ 𝑡d𝑝

,
(3)
where 𝑡min and 𝑡max are the predetermined near and far range of
the camera plane.
The volumetric primitives in MVP have consistent structure
in the UV space of the base mesh, which improves the quality
when extending to multiple identities as it is easier for the network
to learn the shared features across identities compared to other
alternatives based on the NeRF representation [Bühler et al. 2023;
Hong et al. 2022; Wang et al. 2022; Zhuang et al. 2022].
3.2
VRMM
We start by extending the existing person-specific relightable MVP
with a low-dimensional identity code 𝑧𝑖𝑑for our generative volu-
metric morphable head model. Then we discuss our modification to
the network architecture and training process for disentanglement
and better reconstruction quality.


Yang et al.
Up
Up
Up
Up
Up
c
c
.
+
+
𝑧𝑒𝑧𝑖𝑑
𝑧𝑖𝑑
𝑧𝑒, 𝑧𝑖𝑑
𝑧𝑒
𝑧𝑒, 𝐝
𝑙
𝒟𝑇
𝒟𝛼
𝒟𝑟𝑔𝑏
𝒟𝑖𝑑
𝒟𝑚𝑒𝑠ℎ
𝑅𝑝, 𝑡𝑝, 𝑠𝑝
𝐯
𝑉𝑟𝑔𝑏
𝑉𝛼
VRMM
VRMM
VRMM
Reconstruct
𝐼𝑐𝑖𝑛𝑝𝑢𝑡
𝑖,𝑚
𝑧𝑒
𝑖,𝑚
{𝑅, 𝑡}ℎ𝑒𝑎𝑑
𝑖,𝑚
መ𝐼𝑐
𝑖,𝑚
GT
𝑧𝑒
𝑖,𝑚
𝑧𝑖𝑑
𝑗, 𝐝𝑐, 𝑙n
Ƹ𝑧𝑒
𝑖,𝑚
{𝑅, 𝑡}ℎ𝑒𝑎𝑑
𝑖,𝑚
ℒ𝑖𝑚𝑔
. Pointwise product
Training framework
+ Pointwise add
c Concatenate
SG
Stop gradient
Up
ConvT + L-ReLU
Up
Linear ConvT
id condition
id condition
S
G
Up
Up
Up
Up
c
c
.
+
id condition
id condition
S
G
Up
Up
Up
Up
…
…
…
+
c
Up
Up
Up
c
Up
Up
Up
…
…
.
𝑧𝑖𝑑
𝑖, 𝐝, 𝑙m
𝑧𝑖𝑑
𝑖, 𝐝, 𝑙m
ℰ𝑇,𝑒
{𝑅, 𝑡}ℎ𝑒𝑎𝑑
𝑖,𝑚
ℰ𝑒
መመ𝐼𝑐
𝑖,𝑚
𝐼𝑐𝑖𝑛𝑝𝑢𝑡
𝑗,𝑛
ℒ𝑒𝑥𝑝
Figure 2: The VRMM pipeline. Network architecture (left): VRMM accepts inputs of identity code 𝑧𝑖𝑑, expression code 𝑧𝑒,
view direction d, and environmental light 𝑙. The output, comprising a base mesh and volumetric primitives, is generated by
respective decoders and rendered into an image in real-time. Notably, the transformation decoder D𝑇, opacity decoder D𝛼, and
the non-linear branch of the relightable appearance decoder D𝑟𝑔𝑏are interconnected through a detach-concatenation process
between blocks, a key factor we found for achieving stable results. Training Framework (right): Our framework jointly trains
the expression encoder E𝑒, transformation encoder E𝑇, per-person identity codes 𝑧𝑖𝑑, and the decoders in VRMM. Additionally,
we incorporate a novel expression consistency loss L𝑒𝑥𝑝to enhance the semantic alignment of expression codes.
Multi-identity model. Formally, our VRMM maps the identity
code 𝑧𝑖𝑑, the expression code 𝑧𝑒, the view direction d, and the
lighting condition 𝑙to the base mesh and corresponding volumetric
primitives:
{v, 𝑅𝑝,𝑡𝑝,𝑠𝑝,𝑉𝛼,𝑉𝑟𝑔𝑏} = VRMM(𝑧𝑖𝑑,𝑧𝑒, d,𝑙).
(4)
Specifically, VRMM is composed of five decoders:
VRMM := {D𝑚𝑒𝑠ℎ, D𝑖𝑑, D𝑇, D𝛼, D𝑟𝑔𝑏}.
(5)
The mesh decoder D𝑚𝑒𝑠ℎis a multi-layer perceptron that predicts
the vertex positions v of the base mesh given the identity code 𝑧𝑖𝑑
and expression code 𝑧𝑒. The convolutional identity decoder D𝑖𝑑
maps the low-dimensional identity code 𝑧𝑖𝑑to hierarchical feature
maps Falpha and Fappe that are injected to the opacity decoder D𝛼
and appearance decoder D𝑟𝑔𝑏, respectively. The transformation
decoder D𝑇maps the identity code𝑧𝑖𝑑and expression code𝑧𝑒to the
rotation 𝑅𝑝, translation𝑡𝑝, and scale𝑠𝑝of the primitives for identity-
related expression decoding. The opacity decoder D𝛼predicts the
voxel opacity 𝑉𝛼of the primitives conditioned on the expression
code 𝑧𝑒and the feature maps Falpha from the identity encoder.
The relightable appearance decoder D𝑟𝑔𝑏adopts an architecture
similar to [Yang et al. 2023] that takes view direction d, lighting
condition 𝑙, and expression code 𝑧𝑒as input to predict the voxel
color 𝑉𝑟𝑔𝑏with a linear branch for lighting related decoding and
Fappe hierarchically injected to the non-linear branch.
Considering the fact that the transformation and appearance of
the volumetric primitives are closely related, we further concatenate
the feature maps from the intermediate layers of the convolutional
transformation decoder D𝑇to corresponding layers of the opacity
decoder D𝛼and the non-linear branch of the relightable appearance
decoder D𝑟𝑔𝑏, and vice-versa. However, direct concatenation leads
to unstable convergence during training, which we believe is due to
the scale discrepancy of gradient in different branches. So we stop
the gradient back-propagation through the concatenated feature
maps. We empirically find that the detach-concatenate operation
significantly alleviate the jittering of the volumetric primitives
when the numbers of identities and training frames increase.
Different from [Cao et al. 2022] where the meshes and tex-
tures are directly fed into the prior model for identity encoding,
VRMM learns to generate novel relightable identities from the low-
dimensional identity code, enabling VRMM to be used for avatar
reconstruction by directly fitting to images without depending on
traditional mesh-based parametric face models.
Disentangled latent space training. Different from previous volu-
metric head priors [Hong et al. 2022; Zhuang et al. 2022] that are
trained on limited predefined expressions, our VRMM is designed
to encompass a full range of dynamic expressions for animatable
avatar reconstruction. Besides, the relightable appearance means
capturing under varying lighting conditions, which leads to a sig-
nificant challenge, as it is not feasible to capture many people
performing a large number of identical expressions under different
lighting conditions even in the studio.
Inspired by recent cross-identity neural retargeting methods [Xu
et al. 2023; Zhang et al. 2022], we propose a novel framework for
our VRMM to learn shared expression latent space across identities
without explicit supervision. We also adopt the tracking-free train-
ing pipeline [Yang et al. 2023] that jointly learns topology consistent
tracking end-to-end from dynamic image sequences, which avoids
the brittle preprocessing step of surface-tracking (especially with


VRMM: A Volumetric Relightable Morphable Head Model
changing lightings) and enables scalable training for a large number
of different identities.
Specifically, given the training dataset with image 𝐼𝑖,𝑚
𝑐
of dy-
namic performance of subject 𝑖captured by camera 𝑐at frame𝑚un-
der known illumination 𝑙𝑚, we jointly train an expression encoder
E𝑒that predicts the mean and variance of a multi-variant Gaussian
distribution for expression code as well as a transformation encoder
E𝑇that predicts the rigid rotation 𝑅𝑖,𝑚and translation 𝑡𝑖,𝑚of
the head in that frame from a subset of camera views 𝐼𝑖,𝑚
𝑐𝑖𝑛𝑝𝑢𝑡. The
expression code 𝑧𝑒is then sampled from the Gaussian distribution.
The encoding process can be represented as:
𝑧𝑖,𝑚
𝑒
= E𝑒(𝐼𝑖,𝑚
𝑐𝑖𝑛𝑝𝑢𝑡),
(6)
𝑅𝑖,𝑚,𝑡𝑖,𝑚= E𝑇(𝐼𝑖,𝑚
𝑐𝑖𝑛𝑝𝑢𝑡).
(7)
As for the identity code, instead of using the full auto-encoder
framework, we adopt the decoder-only method [Bühler et al. 2023;
Wang et al. 2022] where the identity code 𝑧𝑖
𝑖𝑑for each subject
is initialized with Gaussian noise and jointly optimized with the
networks during training. Note that the auto-decoder framework
learns a generative model though there is not an explicit sampling
process during training as discussed in [Park et al. 2019]. Then the
synthesized image ˆ𝐼𝑖,𝑚
𝑐
of a camera 𝑐with view direction d𝑐and
camera parameters 𝜙𝑐is given by:
ˆ𝐼𝑖,𝑚
𝑐
= Π(VRMM(𝑧𝑖
𝑖𝑑,𝑧𝑖,𝑚
𝑒
, d𝑐,𝑙𝑚), 𝑅𝑖,𝑚,𝑡𝑖,𝑚,𝜙𝑐),
(8)
where Π represents the aforementioned differentiable ray-marching
process for rendering.
The loss L𝑡𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙of the training objective function consists of
three parts:
L𝑡𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙= L𝑖𝑚𝑔+ L𝑟𝑒𝑔+ L𝑒𝑥𝑝,
(9)
where L𝑖𝑚𝑔= L1 +𝜆𝑉𝐺𝐺L𝑉𝐺𝐺comparing the reconstruction ˆ𝐼𝑖,𝑚
𝑐
and the observed image 𝐼𝑖,𝑚
𝑐
consists of the 𝐿1 loss term L1 and the
perceptual loss term L𝑉𝐺𝐺with weight 𝜆𝑉𝐺𝐺. The regularization
loss is given by:
L𝑟𝑒𝑔= 𝜆𝐾𝐿𝐷L𝐾𝐿𝐷+ 𝜆𝑣𝑜𝑙L𝑣𝑜𝑙+ 𝜆𝑠𝑐𝑎𝑙𝑒L𝑠𝑐𝑎𝑙𝑒+ 𝜆𝑖𝑑||𝑧𝑖𝑑||2
2, (10)
where L𝐾𝐿𝐷is the KL-divergence loss between the distribution of
the expression code 𝑧𝑒and multi-variant Gaussian prior. L𝑣𝑜𝑙is
the volume minimization prior proposed in MVP [Lombardi et al.
2021]. The scale regularization term L𝑠𝑐𝑎𝑙𝑒penalizes the 𝑘sides
with the shortest length in the 𝑁𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑚cubic primitives to prevent
the volumetric primitives from squeezing without affecting normal
primitives:
L𝑠𝑐𝑎𝑙𝑒=
∑︁
𝑛∈S
log(1/𝑠𝑛
𝑝),
(11)
where S is the set of indices of the 𝑘shortest sides among all the
sides 𝑠𝑝, and 𝑠𝑛𝑝is the predicted scale of the 𝑛-th side. The 𝐿2
regularization term on identity code 𝑧𝑖𝑑is derived by assuming the
prior distribution of 𝑧𝑖𝑑to be multi-variant Gaussian distribution.
𝜆𝐾𝐿𝐷, 𝜆𝑣𝑜𝑙, 𝜆𝑠𝑐𝑎𝑙𝑒, and 𝜆𝑖𝑑are balancing weights.
We find that the KL-divergence regularization L𝐾𝐿𝐷on the
expression code plays an important role for our VRMM to learn
a disentangled representation for identity and expression. By ap-
plying a much larger regularization weight 𝜆𝐾𝐿𝐷on expression
code compared to 𝜆𝑖𝑑, the information in 𝑧𝑒is limited so that the
expression encoder E𝑒learns to extract only expression-related
Subject
Lighting 1
Lighting 2
Lighting 3
Figure 3: Our model allows real-time global illumination.
The lighting condition is represented as latitude-longitude
environment maps, which is shown on the top.
information while lighting and identity are injected from other
branches. We also experiment with the adversarial training for dis-
entanglement [Schwartz et al. 2020; Zhang et al. 2022] but observe
no improvement.
The system tends to learn a shared expression space even without
a specific constraint as the decoders are shared across identities. To
further align the semantic meaning for the expression code 𝑧𝑒for
different identities, we propose to incorporate a novel expression
consistency loss L𝑒𝑥𝑝. Specifically, given the expression code 𝑧𝑖,𝑚
𝑒
predicted by expression encoder E𝑒from 𝐼𝑖,𝑚
𝑐𝑖𝑛𝑝𝑢𝑡, we randomly
choose an identity code 𝑧𝑗
𝑖𝑑from another identity 𝑗and a different
lighting condition 𝑙𝑛. Then we render images corresponding to 𝑧𝑖,𝑚
𝑒
,
𝑧𝑗
𝑖𝑑, and 𝑙𝑛:
ˆ𝐼𝑗,𝑛
𝑐𝑖𝑛𝑝𝑢𝑡= Π(VRMM(𝑧𝑗
𝑖𝑑,𝑧𝑖,𝑚
𝑒
, d𝑐𝑖𝑛𝑝𝑢𝑡,𝑙𝑛), 𝑅𝑖,𝑚,𝑡𝑖,𝑚,𝜙𝑐𝑖𝑛𝑝𝑢𝑡). (12)
ˆ𝐼𝑗,𝑛
𝑐𝑖𝑛𝑝𝑢𝑡should have the same expression as in 𝐼𝑖,𝑚
𝑐𝑖𝑛𝑝𝑢𝑡but different
identity and lighting condition. We feed ˆ𝐼𝑗,𝑛
𝑐𝑖𝑛𝑝𝑢𝑡to the expression
encoder E𝑒to extract the corresponding expression code ˆ𝑧𝑒𝑖,𝑚. We
also render the image ˆˆ𝐼𝑖,𝑚
𝑐
with ˆ𝑧𝑒𝑖,𝑚, the original identity 𝑧𝑖
𝑖𝑑, and
lighting 𝑙𝑚, as directly measuring the distance in the parameter
space is shown to be inefficient [Tewari et al. 2020, 2017]. The
expression consistency loss L𝑒𝑥𝑝is then given by:
L𝑒𝑥𝑝= 𝜆𝑖𝑚𝑔𝑒𝑥𝑝L𝑖𝑚𝑔𝑒𝑥𝑝+ 𝜆𝑝𝑎𝑟𝑒𝑥𝑝|| ˆ𝑧𝑒𝑖,𝑚−𝑧𝑖,𝑚
𝑒
||2
2,
(13)
where L𝑖𝑚𝑔𝑒𝑥𝑝measures the image space difference similar to
L𝑖𝑚𝑔, 𝜆𝑖𝑚𝑔𝑒𝑥𝑝and 𝜆𝑝𝑎𝑟𝑒𝑥𝑝are the weights of different terms.
3.3
Model Fitting
Once trained, VRMM can be used for avatar reconstruction with
the analysis-by-synthesis scheme as traditional 3DMMs. However,
volumetric avatars include complex components that cannot be
expressed by the constrained parametric space of the prior model,
as it was trained with only hundreds of identities. For faithful
reconstruction, we further finetune VRMM for personalized avatar


Yang et al.
generation similar to [Bühler et al. 2023; Cao et al. 2022; Wang et al.
2022]. We find finetuning can increase the reconstruction quality
but make manipulation deteriorate. Similar distortion-editability
trade-off is also demonstrated in the GAN inversion field [Tov et al.
2021; Zhu et al. 2020]. Our fitting pipeline is specially designed to
preserve the data-driven prior that can create a relightable and
animatable avatar from even a single image. We illustrate our
pipeline for fitting a single in-the-wild image for clarity, which
can be easily extended to image sets.
Inversion. Given an image, we first detect 2D facial landmarks
and optimize the rough rigid transformation and camera projection
parameters with respect to the corresponding predefined 3D land-
marks on the mean base mesh of VRMM for initialization. Then
we jointly optimize the input parameters of VRMM and camera
projection by inverse rendering. Particularly, instead of directly
solving for the identity code 𝑧𝑖𝑑, we find a set of weights w that
linearly blends the existing identity codes in the training set to
constrain the domain. The objective function is formulated as:
arg min
w,𝑧𝑒,𝑙,𝑅,𝑡,𝜙
L𝑖𝑚𝑔+ 𝜆𝑒𝑥𝑝||𝑧𝑒||2
2,
(14)
where L𝑖𝑚𝑔is identical to the data term in Equation 9 and 𝜆𝑒𝑥𝑝
is the weight of regularization term. The lighting 𝑙is restrict to
be non-negative during optimization. The view direction d can be
computed as inversion of the rotation 𝑅.
Fine-tuning. After inversion we obtain an avatar that is animat-
able and relightable but may not authentically replicate the image.
Inspired by Pivotal Tuning [Roich et al. 2022] and DreamBooth [Ruiz
et al. 2023], we propose to finetune the parameters 𝜃of VRMM with
the prior preservation technique to better reproduce the individual
characteristics:
arg min
𝑧𝑒,𝑙,𝑅,𝑡,𝜙,𝜃
L𝑖𝑚𝑔+ 𝜆𝐿𝑅L𝐿𝑅+ 𝜆𝑖𝑑||𝑧𝑖𝑑||2
2 + 𝜆𝑒𝑥𝑝||𝑧𝑒||2
2,
(15)
where 𝜆𝐿𝑅, 𝜆𝑖𝑑, and 𝜆𝑒𝑥𝑝are balancing weights. L𝐿𝑅is the locality
regularization term that restricts the modification to the local region
around the inverted identity code 𝑧∗
𝑖𝑑. Specifically, the interpolated
identity code 𝑧𝑖𝑛𝑡𝑒𝑟
𝑖𝑑
is obtained by linearly blending 𝑧∗
𝑖𝑑with a
randomly selected identity code 𝑧𝑖
𝑖𝑑from the training set with a
weight 𝛼:
𝑧𝑖𝑛𝑡𝑒𝑟
𝑖𝑑
= 𝛼𝑧∗
𝑖𝑑+ (1 −𝛼)𝑧𝑖
𝑖𝑑.
(16)
Then we use the interpolated identity code 𝑧𝑖𝑛𝑡𝑒𝑟
𝑖𝑑
, a randomly
selected expression code 𝑧𝑒, and a lighting condition 𝑙to render
an image with both the fine-tuned VRMM and the original VRMM.
L𝐿𝑅measures the difference of these two images similarly to L𝑖𝑚𝑔.
We have found that fine-tuning for 500 iterations leads to good
convergence, taking about five minutes. Our experiments show
that the locality regularization significantly improves the prior
preservation while having minor effect on the detail reconstruction.
4
EXPERIMENTS
4.1
Dataset
We capture dynamic facial performance of 254 subjects in a custom-
built apparatus with synchronized multi-view cameras and con-
trollable lighting condition. Each subject is asked to perform 21
Ground truth
MoFaNeRF
HeadNeRF
Ours
Figure 4: Qualitative comparison results on novel view syn-
thesis. Our method produces more faithful results compared
to existing parametric head models MoFaNeRF [Zhuang et al.
2022] and HeadNeRF [Hong et al. 2022].
predefined expressions, read out a paragraph, look at different di-
rections and freely perform exaggerated and combined expressions.
We record 1800 frames for each subject at 16fps with 29 cameras
surrounding the head with a resolution of 2448 × 2048. We utilize
the group light pattern with basic background illumination [Bi
et al. 2021; Yang et al. 2023] for relightable model capture. We
also capture a full-on frame every four shots. The background
images are recorded and alpha blended with the rendering during
training similar to previous work [Lombardi et al. 2021; Yang et al.
2023]. The unprecedented dataset consists of more than 13M images
in total with diverse dynamic expressions and known varying
illuminations. Notice that the expressions do not need to be aligned
or registered for different identities thanks to our self-supervised
training framework, allowing for flexible dynamic performance
capture. The network training on the dataset takes about two weeks
on eight NVIDIA V100 graphics cards.
4.2
Qualitative Results
Latent space evaluation. Figure 5 shows interpolation between
the identity codes of different individuals while keeping expression
code and lighting condition fixed. The relighting results are shown
in Figure 3. The visualization shows that the identity, expression
and illumination spaces of our VRMM are fully disentangled and
can be freely combined, which demonstrates the effectiveness of
our self-supervised training framework.
Avatar personalization. Our model can be utilized to create per-
sonalized avatars from few-shot captures. Figure 6 shows that
VRMM generates high-fidelity relightable and animatable avatars
by fitting multi-view images from various sources. The first two
rows are from the Multiface Dataset [Wuu et al. 2022], which are
collected in a multi-view capture system with 40 and 146 cameras,
respectively. We use the images of one frame as input. The middle


VRMM: A Volumetric Relightable Morphable Head Model
Figure 5: Interpolation results between three identities (left, center, right). Our model learns a smooth identity latent space that
allows linear interpolation. Besides, the expression keeps unchanged during the interpolation, confirming that the expression
and identity spaces have been effectively disentangled.
Table 2: Quantitative evaluation results.
Novel view synthesis
Single-view reconstruction
Method
MAE ↓
SSIM ↑
LPIPS ↓
MAE ↓
SSIM ↑
LPIPS ↓
MoFaNeRF
28.3
0.829
0.247
35.00
0.878
0.199
HeadNeRF
17.19
0.892
0.211
14.07
0.905
0.163
Ours
5.29
0.950
0.120
4.45
0.933
0.106
two rows are from [Yang et al. 2023] with 23 input views. The last
two rows are captured in our studio. The personalization is per-
formed given only three images. Please refer to our accompanying
video for the corresponding animations results.
4.3
Comparisons
We compare our method with existing publicly available paramet-
ric head models, i.e., HeadNeRF [Hong et al. 2022] and MoFaN-
eRF [Zhuang et al. 2022].
Novel view synthesis. We conduct both qualitative and quanti-
tative evaluations on the task of novel view synthesis using the
Multiface Dataset [Wuu et al. 2022]. The parametric models are
fitted to multi-view images from a single frame of each subject,
and performance is measured against five held out views. The
visual comparison is provided in Figure 4, with detailed quantitative
results presented in Table 2.
Single-view reconstruction. Figure 7 shows qualitative compari-
son results for single-view head reconstruction. The average quan-
titative fitting error on 100 in-the-wild images from the FFHQ
dataset [Karras et al. 2019] is reported in Table 2. These calculations
are confined to the regions shared by different methods. Our method
can achieve high-quality reconstruction results from a single in-
the-wild image, while other baselines produce less accurate results.
4.4
Ablation Study
Expression consistency constraint. We conduct an ablation study
to evaluate the effectiveness of the expression consistency loss
(ECL). The experimental model is trained without expression con-
sistency loss while keeping other parts identical. Then we set the
expression code as the one corresponding to the target image to
evaluate the expression consistency across identities. The results in
Figure 8 show that our method learns more consistent expressions
for different identities compared with the model w/o ECL.
Locality regularization loss. We attempt to remove our proposed
locality regularization loss (LRL). The results are shown in Figure 9.
We perform personalization using 39 images of a single frame
from the Multiface Dataset. The personalized avatar is animated
by the expression code corresponding to the target expression.
The fine-tuning deteriorates the prior model without the locality
regularization loss, which results in inaccurate animation results.
5
CONCLUSION
We present VRMM, the first volumetric morphable head model that
enables continuous control over expression, identity, and global
illumination. Through an elaborately designed training framework,
VRMM is capable of disentangling complex attributes from multi-
view sequences of casually varied expressions and lightings in
a self-supervised manner. Once trained, VRMM can serve as a
powerful prior for various reconstruction tasks. Combined with the
novel fitting technique we propose, VRMM requires only minimal
observations to accurately fit a specific portrait and generate an
animatable and relightable avatar with real-time rendering. We
believe this work will have a profound impact on the development
of the field.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank Xiaoqiang Liu for being our capture subject, the authors
of [Zhuang et al. 2022] and [Hong et al. 2022] for releasing their
source code and pretrained models, as well as anonymous reviewers
for their insightful feedback.


Yang et al.
Reference
Reconstruction
Relighting
Animation
Figure 6: Few-shot personalization results. Given multi-view images of a subject in a static expression under unknown fixed
illumination, our model enables the creation of a high-fidelity avatar that can be animated and relighted. Our model learns the
relightable appearance even when the input images suffer from strong specular reflection.
A
IMPLEMENTATION DETAILS
We provide the values of hyperparameters in Table 3. The detailed
neural network architecture is shown in Figure 11. The network
is initially trained without the expression consistency loss L𝑒𝑥𝑝
for efficiency. Subsequently, L𝑒𝑥𝑝is incorporated and the network
continues training until it converges.
B
ADDITIONAL EXPERIMENTS
B.1
Evaluation of Personalization
Animation. We evaluate the animation quality of the few-shot
personalized avatar with held-out identities from the captured
dataset. The fitting is performed on different numbers of frames in
Table 3: Values of our hyperparameters.
Parameter
Value
Parameter
Value
Parameter
Value
𝑁𝑙
356
𝑁𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑚
16384
𝜆𝑉𝐺𝐺
0.1
𝜆𝐾𝐿𝐷
0.01
𝜆𝑣𝑜𝑙
0.01
𝜆𝑠𝑐𝑎𝑙𝑒
0.01
𝜆𝑖𝑑
0.0001
𝜆𝑖𝑚𝑔𝑒𝑥𝑝
0.2
𝜆𝑝𝑎𝑟𝑒𝑥𝑝
0.02
𝜆𝑒𝑥𝑝
0.01
𝜆𝐿𝑅
0.1
varying expressions and other frames are used to drive the avatar.
As shown in Figure 10, the animation resembles to the ground truth
expression, and personal idiosyncrasies are more distinct when the
number of reference expressions increases.


VRMM: A Volumetric Relightable Morphable Head Model
Input
MoFaNeRF
HeadNeRF
Ours
Figure 7: Comparison with existing volumetric head priors, MoFaNeRF [Zhuang et al. 2022] and HeadNeRF [Hong et al.
2022], on single-view head reconstruction. We show the fitting results in the original view as well as two different views. The
reconstruction results of our method achieve significantly better visual quality.
Target
w/o ECL
Ours
Figure 8: Ablation experiment about the expression consis-
tency loss (ECL). By adding the expression consistency loss,
our model learns a more unified expression space of different
identities.
Source
w/o LRL
Ours
Target
Figure 9: Ablation study on the locality regularization loss.
The locality regularization loss helps our model to keep the
knowledge from the prior during fine-tuning, resulting in
accurate expression transfer after personalization.
Relighting. The relighting results of the personalized avatar from
different numbers of views are compared to the ground truth images
captured under known illumination. Figure 12 shows the results.
Single frame
5 frames
20 frames
Ground truth
LPIPS: 0.275
LPIPS: 0.262
LPIPS: 0.254
LPIPS: 0.315
LPIPS: 0.300
LPIPS: 0.291
Figure 10: The assessment of animation quality is depicted
in the left three columns, illustrating the animated results
of the personalized avatar derived from varying numbers
of frames. The accuracy of expression amplitude improves,
and additional identity-specific wrinkles emerge as the
number of reference images increases. Quantitative metrics
for each animation are displayed at the top-right corner of
the corresponding image.
Our VRMM achieves accurate relighting from as few as three view
inputs (frontal, left, right). The relighting accuracy is slightly im-
proved with more input views, which demonstrates the robustness
of our personalization framework.


Yang et al.
Reshape
ConvT(256, 256, 4, 2) & LReLU
ConvT(128, 128, 4, 2) & LReLU
ConvT(256, 128, 4, 2) & LReLU
ConvT(128, 64, 4, 2) & LReLU
ConvT(64, 64, 4, 2) & LReLU
ConvT(64, 32, 4, 2) & LReLU
ConvT(32, 32, 4, 2) & LReLU
FC & Reshape
ConvT(128, 128, 4, 2)
ConvT(64, 64, 4, 2)
ConvT(128, 64, 4, 2)
ConvT(64, 32, 4, 2)
ConvT(32, 32, 4, 2)
ConvT(32, 16, 4, 2)
ConvT(16, 16, 4, 2)
FC & Reshape
ConvT(640, 128, 4, 2) & LReLU
ConvT(320, 64, 4, 2) & LReLU
ConvT(384, 64, 4, 2) & LReLU
ConvT(192, 32, 4, 2) & LReLU
ConvT(160, 32, 4, 2) & LReLU
ConvT(41, 16, 4, 2) & LReLU
ConvT(16, 16, 4, 2) & LReLU
FC & Reshape
ConvT(640, 128, 4, 2) & LReLU
ConvT(320, 64, 4, 2) & LReLU
ConvT(384, 64, 4, 2) & LReLU
ConvT(192, 32, 4, 2) & LReLU
ConvT(160, 32, 4, 2) & LReLU
ConvT(41, 16, 4, 2) & LReLU
ConvT(16, 16, 4, 2) & LReLU
FC & Reshape
ConvT(768, 256, 4, 2) & LReLU
ConvT(384, 128, 4, 2) & LReLU
ConvT(512, 256, 4, 2) & LReLU
ConvT(256, 128, 4, 2) & LReLU
ConvT(192, 9, 4, 2)
ConvT(16, 8, 4, 2) & ReLU
ConvT(16, 24, 4, 2)
ConvT(16, 24, 4, 2)
ConvT(1024, 512, 4, 2) & LReLU
ConvT(512, 512, 4, 2) & LReLU
+
+
.
c
c
c
S
G
S
G
+
+
.
.
……
……
……
𝑅𝑝, 𝑡𝑝, 𝑠𝑝
𝑉𝑟𝑔𝑏
𝑉𝛼
𝑧𝑖𝑑
𝑙
𝑧𝑒, 𝐝
𝑧𝑒
𝑧𝑒, 𝑧𝑖𝑑
Figure 11: Detailed neural network architecture of VRMM. The transposed convolutional layer is represented as
𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑣𝑇(𝑖𝑛𝑝𝑢𝑡𝑐ℎ𝑎𝑛𝑛𝑒𝑙𝑠,𝑜𝑢𝑡𝑝𝑢𝑡𝑐ℎ𝑎𝑛𝑛𝑒𝑙𝑠,𝑘𝑒𝑟𝑛𝑒𝑙𝑠𝑖𝑧𝑒,𝑠𝑡𝑟𝑖𝑑𝑒). The inter-connections between intermediate layers are omitted to avoid
clutter. The expression encoder E𝑒, transformation encoder E𝑇, and the mesh decoder D𝑚𝑒𝑠ℎare identical to that in [Yang et al.
2023].
Source
3 views
29 views
Ground truth
LPIPS: 0.249
LPIPS: 0.247
LPIPS: 0.282
LPIPS: 0.281
Figure 12: The evaluation of relighting performance is
showcased, where VRMM is adapted to different numbers
of views captured under the original source lighting, as
displayed in the left column. The model demonstrates the
capability to achieve accurate relighting outcomes even with
a minimal set of views.
B.2
Additional Ablations
Detach-concatenation operation. We conduct experiments to eval-
uate the effectiveness of the detach-concatenation operation. We
ablate two alternative choices:
w/o connection
w/o SG
Ours
Ground truth
Figure 13: Ablation study on the detach-concatenation
operation. The rendered images get blurred as the number of
identities increases without the inter-connection. Moreover,
without detaching, the training process fails to converge.
The detach-concatenation leads to clearer and more accurate
renderings in the final output.
(1) w/o connection: We remove the inter-connection between
the transformation decoder D𝑇and other two decoders.
(2) w/o SG: The stop gradient operation is removed and the
inter-connection falls back to vanilla feature concatenation.
