Title: One2Avatar: Generative Implicit Head Avatar For Few-shot User Adaptation

One2Avatar: Generative Implicit Head Avatar For Few-shot User Adaptation
Zhixuan Yu1,2*
Ziqian Bai1
Abhimitra Meka1
Feitong Tan1
Qiangeng Xu1
Rohit Pandey1
Sean Fanello1
Hyun Soo Park2
Yinda Zhang1
1Google
2University of Minnesota
…
…
3D Animatable Avatar
Rendered Images
One-shot Input
Multi-view Multi-expression Data
3D Generative 
Avatar Prior
…
Figure 1. We present a new approach to generate an animatable photo-realistic avatar from only a few or even one image of the target
person. We encode the geometry and appearance by leveraging a neural radiance field that is generated by a 3D generative model learned
from multi-view multi-expression data. With this model, we render the high fidelity head avatar seen from a novel view.
Abstract
Traditional methods for constructing high-quality, per-
sonalized head avatars from monocular videos demand ex-
tensive face captures and training time, posing a signifi-
cant challenge for scalability. This paper introduces a novel
approach to create high quality head avatar utilizing only
a single or a few images per user.
We learn a genera-
tive model for 3D animatable photo-realistic head avatar
from a multi-view dataset of expressions from 2407 subjects,
and leverage it as a prior for creating personalized avatar
from few-shot images. Different from previous 3D-aware
face generative models, our prior is built with a 3DMM-
anchored neural radiance field backbone, which we show to
be more effective for avatar creation through auto-decoding
based on few-shot inputs. We also handle unstable 3DMM
fitting by jointly optimizing the 3DMM fitting and camera
calibration that leads to better few-shot adaptation. Our
method demonstrates compelling results and outperforms
existing state-of-the-art methods for few-shot avatar adap-
tation, paving the way for more efficient and personalized
avatar creation. Please see our webpage for more results.
*Work was conducted while Zhixuan Yu was an intern at Google.
1. Introduction
Creating photo-realistic animatable head avatars is a ma-
jor enabling factor of authentic social telepresence, which
opens up a new opportunity in cross-domains including
communication [1, 28], embodied AI [2], and volumetric
content [16, 23].
Among many models, neural radiance
fields [25], in particular, offer a powerful, flexible, and gen-
eralizable representation that allows generating 3D photo-
realistic head avatars from images. This eliminates the need
for specialized expertise and hardware to obtain paired 3D
annotation [16, 22, 34]. However, these methods built upon
the neural radiance field models [8, 22, 34] require exten-
sive video sequences of the user capturing diverse facial
expressions seen from various viewpoints, followed by a
long avatar creation process to achieve a high-fidelity head
avatar, which significantly impairs scalability.
One way to mitigate the data requirements is to lever-
age a prior model learned from large scale data. Such a
data-driven prior has been shown to benefit 3D synthesis
for static faces for few-shot inputs [7, 10].
In the con-
text of learning animatable head avatars, several methods
[3, 4, 14] have explored using parametric models of faces,
that are built using large 3D data collections, to better con-
strain the problem. However, these methods often struggle
to produce high-quality avatars from limited input data, re-
arXiv:2402.11909v1  [cs.CV]  19 Feb 2024


sulting in noticeable animation artifacts and identity shifts.
Such prior models have limited expressibility either due to
low-dimensionality or due to being trained on collections
of single-view images, which limits their ability to learn
the subtle variations in facial expressions and appearance
from different viewpoints that are crucial for creating real-
istic and convincing head avatars. On the other hand, talk-
ing heads datasets [11, 26, 27] come with a large number of
training frames, however these datasets are rarely used for
learning avatar prior presumably because they contain lim-
ited identities, less expression diversity, and 3D tracking is
not easily accessible and stable.
In this paper, we aim to create high quality photo-
realistic controllable head avatars from sparse inputs, e.g.
just a few shots of casually captured images of the subject.
The core of our method is to learn a generative model from
various identities and expressions that can serve as a prior
for an animatable head avatar, which encodes not only 3D-
aware photo-realistic portrait heads but also dynamic defor-
mations correlated with avatar controlling signals, e.g. fa-
cial expression and head rotations. Realizing that existing
public available data sources are not sufficient, we resort
to a customized data capture protocol to collect data that
best serves the learning of an avatar prior. Note that sim-
ply adding the missing diversity around camera viewpoint
and expression at an equivalent scale of the identity (e.g.
70K in FFHQ [17]) can easily overwhelm the data quantity
and lead to an unaffordable capture workload. We found
that with a balanced mixture of information across iden-
tity, camera, and expression, a reasonable prior model for
avatars can be learnt even from a relatively smaller scale of
identities. In particular, we collect portrait images of 2407
subjects from 13 camera viewpoints for up to 13 types of
expressions, resulting in 208K images in total.
We use a state-of-the-art avatar representation – 3DMM-
anchored Neural Radiance Field [4], and build our gener-
ative prior model on it. Our model produces an identity
embedding from a learned latent space and an expression
embedding from 3DMM parameters, which are mapped to
the 3DMM UV space. These two embeddings are then re-
sampled to the vertices of the 3DMM mesh and interpreted
by MLPs into a continuous neural radiance field. Our avatar
generative prior is learned directly through auto-decoding
and supervised using a reconstruction loss.
To create 3D-aware portraits from few-shot images, pre-
vious work optimize the latent space of a generative model
that captures the user identity, which may involve also fine-
tuning of the network parameters [30]. This process is no-
tably unstable and strongly dependent on the specific testing
data used. The additional dependency on facial expression
also adds challenges to few-shot adaptation. Poor estima-
tion of camera pose and facial expressions also causes sub-
optimal adaptation performance. Especially in multi-view
setting, inaccurate face fittings lead to misaligned appear-
ance during the optimization, and result in blurry rendering
results. To overcome this, Our method jointly optimizes
for all the parameters, including the identity latent code,
3DMM expression parameters, camera pose, and network
weights of the neural radiance field decoder.
In summary, our contributions are as follows:
• We demonstrate that a dynamic photo-realistic head
avatar prior model can be effectively learned from a cap-
tured dataset of a practical size.
• We show that the expression and camera view diversity
is essential to such a prior, and should be balanced with
identity diversity to form an affordable capture workload.
• We present a generative head avatar model built with a
3DMM-anchored neural radiance field backbone, which
encodes both identity (appearance and geometry) and de-
formation priors.
• We propose a joint optimization framework for camera
pose and face fitting along with the generative inverse fit-
ting to stabilize the few-shot adaptation.
Extensive experiments show that our method enable high
quality photo-realistic avatar creation from single or few-
shot input images.
2. Related Work
2.1. Video-based 3D Avatar Creation
Since the introduction of implicit 3D representations like
Neural Radience Fields [25], remarkable results have been
shown for creating an animatable 3D head avatar for a tar-
get subject from a monocular selfie video sequence captur-
ing various of expressions and head rotations. Early ap-
proaches derive an avatar directly as a neural radiance field
conditioned on the 3DMM parameters [14], or build an
avatar in a canonical space (e.g. neutral expression) which
is then warped to the target expression based on a 3DMM
driven deformation field [3]. More recently, another line
of work [4] attaches local features to 3DMM mesh ver-
tices and establishes a dynamic neutral radiance field that
can be deformed with the mesh. This type of geometry-
anchored representation explicitly leverages 3D geometry
as a prior that offers controllability for human avatars in
a natural way. However, all of these works require hun-
dreds of subject-specific images for training. In contrast,
we adopt a geometry-anchored representation and augment
it with generative capabilities that enable few-shot avatar
creation, alleviating the requirement for an extensive video
sequence from every target subject, which hinders scalabil-
ity.
2.2. Data-driven Prior for 3D Head Synthesis
A series of works [7–10, 10, 13, 15, 24, 29, 32] explore 3D-
aware portrait generation from few-shot images using gen-
2


erative priors. They pre-learn from existing datasets con-
taining a large corpus of subjects, significantly reducing the
data required from a specific user. One line of work relies
on an encoder to extract pixel-aligned features from multi-
view images [24, 29], however, these methods suffer from
generalization to novel data due to the missing optimization
phase during test time.
On the other hand, 3D-aware generative image synthe-
sis approaches [9, 10, 13, 15] learn a prior distribution of
human faces from large in-the-wild face image datasets, al-
lowing reconstruction of volumetric radiance fields of novel
subjects by performing inversion and fine-tuning of the
model [30] on one or few images of the target identity.
While offering enhanced quality, they are predominantly
trained on large-scale in-the-wild single-view images with
a sharp distribution of frontal head pose images, prevent-
ing generalization to more extreme camera views.
Pref-
ace [7] addresses this limitation by learning a prior from
a multi-view dataset of diverse neutral faces. Sharing simi-
lar intuitions, we propose to leverage multi-view and multi-
expression data to learn a prior for animatable avatars.
Other approaches [8] leverage a large scale in-house
dataset comprising of millions of images from tens of cam-
eras with registration to build a universal prior. New users
are then enrolled via a scanning procedure that requires spe-
cialized depth sensors to provide a sufficient level of quality.
2.3. 3D Avatar Generation
This area of research focuses on developing controllable
avatars, where the primary challenge lies in how to ef-
fectively model avatar deformations and design the gen-
eration backbone. AniFaceGAN [35] extends a 3D-aware
image generation method [13] for a static head to be ani-
matable by modelling a deformation field mapping query
point from observation space to canonical space. Omni-
Avatar [36] pre-learns such a mapping from FLAME [21]
mesh collections while using tri-planes [10] to represent the
3D feature space of a head in canonical space. Next3D [31]
is also built on top of a tri-plane based generation back-
bone [10] but utilizes explicit mesh-guided deformation to
transfer generated neural textures from UV domain to tri-
planes by rasterizing deformed 3DMM mesh. While the
focus of these methods is on generating an avatar for novel
subjects, they still demonstrate the downstream application
for one-shot avatar creation [31] via pivotal tuning inver-
sion (PTI) [30], which aligns with our goal.
However,
those works are trained only on single-view datasets (e.g.
FFHQ [17]) and show limited generalizability towards ex-
treme camera poses and unseen expressions.
3. Method
Given a sparse set of M facial images {I1, I2, ..., IM} of a
person capturing the current appearance (M can be as small
as one), our goal is to reconstruct an animatable photo-
realistic head avatar that can be rendered from a novel view
point. We learn a generative avatar prior that provides a set
of generic features shared across identities and expressions
from a multiview dataset of 2407 identities. Given the prior
model, we generalize it to a target identity given M number
of images.
3.1. Multi-view Multi-Expression Face Capture
We capture high-resolution facial images of a total 2407
subjects in 13 pre-defined facial expression from 13 sparse
camera viewpoints. For each subject at each expression, we
run a 3DMM fitting algorithm based on facial landmarks
and reconstruct 3D geometry from multi-view images [5].
Our dataset includes a limited number of distinctive sub-
jects compared to the existing data, e.g., 70K in FFHQ [17].
Nonetheless, it includes a wide range of facial expressions,
which plays a key role in learning a generative prior model.
Please refer to supplementary materials for more details
of the capturing setup, including camera placement, pre-
defined expressions, and other statistics.
3.2. Generative Avatar Prior
Our generative avatar prior generates an avatar represented
by a neural radiance field. Given an identity code w and an
expression code ψ, our model f generates the local color c
and density σ for a 3D query point q viewed from direction
d:
σ(q), c(q) = f(w, ψ, q, d; θ),
(1)
where θ are the model weights. The color image is then
generated by applying a volumetric rendering formulation
[25] to get per-pixel color:
ˆc =
Z tf
tn
T(t)σq(r(t))cq(r(t), d) dt,
(2)
where T(t) = exp

−
R t
tn σq(r(s)) ds

. Following prior
arts, we adopt the 3DMM expression code space for ψ and
learn a latent space Rl for w.
3DMM-Anchored Avatar Generative Model.
Inspired
by Bai et al. [4], we adopt a 3DMM-anchored neural ra-
diance field as our avatar representation (Fig.
2 right).
Specifically, instead of encoding all rendering information
into a high-capacity neural network, local features are at-
tached on the vertices of the 3DMM mesh scaffold recon-
structed for the target identity and expression. During ren-
dering, each query point aggregates the features from k-
Nearest-Neighbors (kNN) in the 3DMM vertices and sends
it into a MLP network to predict color and density. To sim-
plify learning using existing 2D CNNs, the 3DMM vertex-
attached features can be learned in the unified UV space and
sampled using texture coordinates.
3


…
Latent Table
Identity Branch
Expression Branch
⊕
3D Vertex 
Disp. Map
…
Fit. Corr. Table
∆Rm, ∆tm, ∆ m
3DMM 
Fit. Corr.
Expression  
Latent Codew
3DMM-anchored 
Neural Radiance Field
…
…
q
Query Point
d
View Dir.
Z
r
YWmhCmEym7dDJg5mJUGI+wx9wq3/gTtz6Af6A3+GkzcK2HrhwOde7uF4MaNCmua3VlpaXldK69XNja3tnf03b2OiBKOSRtHLOJdDwnCaEjakpGujEnKPAYefBG17n/8Ei4oF4L8cxcQI0CGmfYiSV5OoHdtp0rRpsuvUaNAwjZ7d25upV0zAngIvEKkgVFGi5+
o/tRzgJSCgxQ0L0LDOWToq4pJiRrGIngsQIj9CA9BQNUCEk07yZ/BYKT7sR1xNKOFE/XuRokCIceCpzQDJoZj3cvE/r5fI/qWT0jBOJAnx9FE/YVBGMC8D+pQTLNlYEYQ5VkhHiKOsFSVzXzxR4tq6hirPkaFkmnbljnxtndabVxVRUBofgCJwAC1yABrgBLd
AGDyBF/AK3rRn7V370D6nqyWtuNkHM9C+fgFBsJvU</latexit>{I1, I2, ..., IM}
G
U-Net
Identity Feat. 
Map FI
Expr. Feat. 
Map FE
Fit. Updates
Figure 2. We adopt a 3DMM-anchored neural radiance field (NeRF) as our avatar representation, where the feature for each query point
is aggregated from its k-Nearest-Neighbors in the 3DMM vertices and decoded to color and density via a shallow MLP netowrk. The
StyleGAN2 [18] generator based identity branch encodes personalized characteristics into an identity feature map from a latent code
uniquely assigned to a training subject. The expression branch produces an expression feature map from 3DMM expression code via a
U-Net. The summation of two feature maps are then sampled by 3DMM vertices via texture coordinates to establish the 3DMM-anchored
neural radiance field. For few-shot adaptation, we initialize the target latent code with the mean latent code across training subjects and
jointly optimize it with the model weights as well as per-frame 3DMM fitting corrections on given images of the target person.
Our generative prior model generates identity and ex-
pression embeddings registered in the 3DMM UV space
(Fig.
2 left).
In the identity branch, we use a Style-
GAN2 [18] generator to synthesize an identity feature map
FI ∈Rh×w×ci, where h and w are the resolution of the
UV space, from a l dimensional latent space. In the ex-
pression branch, similar to MonoAvatar [4], we train a
convolutional-based U-Net to predict an expression feature
map FE ∈Rh×w×ce from a vertex displacement map en-
coding per-vertex 3D deformation between 3DMM in neu-
tral and the target expression. The summation of two fea-
ture maps are then sampled by 3DMM vertices via texture
coordinates to establish the 3DMM-anchored neural radi-
ance field. In practice, we set h = w = 256, ci = ce = 64,
and l = 512.
Auto-decoding Based Learning.
We learn a generative
avatar prior in an auto-decoding fashion [6]. Specifically,
we assign each subject in our data a learnable latent vector,
and jointly optimize them with the StyleGAN2-based [18]
identity branch and the U-Net based expression branch.
Note that such training strategy can be highly unstable if
very little data is available for each subject (e.g. one image
per subject like that in FFHQ [17]) since the latent space w
is highly under constrained. With plenty of variation from
various expression and camera viewpoints in our data, we
directly apply the ℓ1 loss between the rendered images with
the ground truth images without applying any latent space
regularization loss. We observe that with a subject count
exceeding approximately 2,000, the learned latent space ex-
hibits smoothness and enables natural interpolation.
3.3. Few-shot Adaptation
Given the learned generative prior, we jointly adapt its
weights and learn a new latent code wtarget assigned to a
target identity given the M views.
To make training stable and converge faster, we ini-
tialize the target latent code with the mean latent code
across training subjects. We follow the training schedule
of PTI [30] that alternatively performs model inversion to
optimize wtarget and fine-tune the model weights θ.
While the proposed generative prior model learning and
adaptation enables few-shot avatar creation, we empirically
find that this process can be unstable and is strongly depen-
dent on the specific testing data. This is because the 3DMM
fitting from a single view image is often not accurate in the
presence of occlusions.
To alleviate this, we propose to jointly optimize cam-
era pose and 3DMM facial expressions in addition to fine-
tuning the model weights:
wtarget, θtarget =
argmin
w,θ,{∆Rm,∆tm,∆ψm}
Lrecon + Lreg, (3)
where {∆Rm, ∆tm, ∆ψm} is additive updates to camera
4


rotation, translation, and 3DMM expression code for each
given image of the target identity, m denotes image index,
Lrecon is an ℓ1 loss between the rendered RGB values and
the ground truth ones, and Lreg is a ℓ2 regularization loss on
those updates:
Lreg = Σm∥∆Rm∥2
2 + ∥∆tm∥2
2 + ∥∆ψm∥2
2
(4)
3.4. Training Schema
Our prior model is trained on a multi-view dataset with pho-
tometric loss, where we penalize the ℓ1 distance between
the rendering and the ground truth images. We optimize the
prior model as an auto-decoder, where each identity has a
latent code with 512 dimensions. For each training step,
we randomly sample 256 pixels from 8 views of 4 expres-
sions of 16 subjects, which yields a batch size of 131072.
We train on 2407 subjects, each containing up to 13 differ-
ent expressions and each expression contains 13 views. The
prior model is trained on 16 GPUs for 1M steps, which takes
around six days. We optimize our model using Adam [19]
with the learning rate set to 0.0005.
4. Experiments
In this section, we assess the performance of our approach
under various scenarios, demonstrating the effectiveness of
the learned latent representation to synthesize new subjects
and its applicability for few-shot adaptation tasks.
4.1. Evaluation Dataset, Metrics and Baselines
Monocular selfie-video dataset We use a monocular RGB
video dataset consisting of 6 subjects casually captured us-
ing smartphones and webcams, from MonoAvatar [4]. Each
subject captures two distinct sessions for training and test-
ing. In the training session, the subjects rotate their head as
performing a series of expressions including extremes ones;
in the testing session, the subjects performed expressions
freely. Each subject contains 506 −780 frames of the train-
ing session and 320−603 frames of the testing session, both
being uniformly down-sampled from the video. Each frame
consists of an RGB image with the background filtered out,
a 3DMM fit and estimated camera parameters. For all the
experiments, quantitative evaluations are performed on all
testing frames for each subject.
Metrics We employ the standard image quality metrics
for our quantitative evaluations: Learned Perceptual Image
Patch Similarity (LPIPS) [37], Peak Signal-to-Noise Ratio
(PSNR), and Structure Similarity Index (SSIM) [33], fol-
lowing previous works [4, 14].
Baselines In our experiments, we use the five baselines:
(1) MonoAvatar [4] is a method to create a personalized
3D avatar using the same avatar backbone as ours.
(2)
Next3D [31] is the state-of-the-art 3DMM conditional 3D-
aware face generative model using tri-planes [10] as avatar
backbone. One-shot avatar creation has been demonstrated
in their paper using PTI [30], which can be extended to
leverage more images when available.
(3) A variant of
our method that uses the tri-planar representation (similar
to Next3D) as a backbone with the avatar prior trained on
our full dataset. We refer to this baseline as ”Ours-TP”.
(4) A variant of our model with the avatar prior trained on
FFHQ [17] dataset. We run an off-the-shelf 3DMM fitting
algorithm [21] to get the parametric model parameters for
each individual image, and train our model treating each im-
age as a unique identity. We refer to this baseline as ”Ours-
FFHQ”. (5) A variant of our model with the avatar prior
trained using single-view data from our captured dataset.
Specifically, we randomly pick one out of the 13 cameras
for each subject, and use only the data from that camera for
training. We refer to this baseline as ”Ours-SV”.
4.2. Comparison on Few-shot Adaptation
In this section, we compare our approach to existing few-
shot avatar adaptation methods. We analyze the behavior of
our model with respect to the available quantity of training
data, number of training iterations and quality with respect
to out of training expressions. Finally, we present an exper-
iment showcasing the generative capabilities of our latent
representation.
4.2.1
Few-shot Adaptation
In this section, we evaluate the performance of our method
on the few-shot avatar creation.
We compare with the
state-of-the-art 3DMM conditional 3D-aware face genera-
tive model Next3D [31] and personalized avatar method
MonoAvatar [4]. For Next3D, we run PTI [30] with few-
shot images on the official pre-trained model. MonoAvatar
models are trained from scratch.
Quality w.r.t quantity of training data. For each method,
we create avatars for each subject using different number
of images, i.e. 1, 5, 10, 20, 10%, and 100% of the training
data. For each case, we uniformly sample images from the
training split and use the same set of images for all three
methods. We found the sampled images empirically cover
a reasonable range of expression and camera viewpoints.
The quantitative comparison is shown in Fig. 3.
Our
method significantly outperforms the other methods espe-
cially at few-shot settings (e.g. number of views is smaller
than 10). Both our method and MonoAvatar use more train-
ing images effectively with consistently better performance,
but our method keeps a consistent performance gain over
MonoAvatar even when using 100% of the data. This indi-
cates that our generative prior also provides a good initial-
ization of the network weights for learning the avatar.
Some qualitative results from one-shot and five-shot
adaptation are shown in Fig. 6.
Our method produces
5


Figure 3. New subject adaptation for different methods as varying % of training data. Our proposed method consistently outperforms the
state-of-the-art approaches, particularly at the low data regime (e.g., one image). Even as the amount of training data increases, our method
maintains its superior performance.
Figure 4. Cross-method comparison against the training time (left)
and the test images grouped in five bins: expressions of images in
bins with larger index are less similar to the training image (right).
avatar results with more accurate expression, more consis-
tent identity, and less artifacts compared to Next3D and
MonoAvatar.
Quality w.r.t training time. For the settings that use 10%
or all training images where our result are relative close to
MonoAvatar [4], we additionally compare quality against
training iterations and show results in Fig. 4 (Left). It can
be seen that our performance improves much faster than
MonoAvatar at fewer iterations. Our model achieves the
same quality in fewer iterations (e.g. our method achieves
LPIPS = 0.18 in 1/8 the number of iterations compared
to MonoAvatar), owing to the learnt latent space.
Quality w.r.t testing expression. To illustrate the ability of
our generative model to learn both identity and motion pri-
ors, we evaluate the performance of all three methods in the
one-shot scenario on testing frames with varying the expres-
sion similarity (i.e. ℓ2 distance between 3DMM expression
codes) to the training frame. As depicted in Fig. 4 (Right),
all methods exhibit a decline in performance as the expres-
sion difference between the testing and training frames in-
creases. However, our method demonstrates a more gradual
decline compared to the other two approaches.
4.2.2
Generative Avatar Prior
Finally we briefly show the generative quality of our learned
avatar prior.
We linearly interpolate between two iden-
tity latent codes and show the avatar renderings in differ-
ent expressions and camera viewpoints in Fig. 5. Our prior
model learns a smooth and interpolatable latent space, and
the generated avatar images show appealing visual quality
and consistent identity across multiple controlling signals.
Compared to the variant using tri-planes as avatar back-
bone (“Ours-TP”) or single-view subset of our training data
(“Ours-SV”), our full method generates more realistic and
sharper results.
One-shot
Five-shot
LPIPS ↓/ PSNR ↑/ SSIM ↑
LPIPS ↓/ PSNR ↑/ SSIM ↑
MonoAvatar [4]
0.358 / 14.93 / 0.630
0.232 / 17.59 / 0.712
Next3D [31]
0.296 / 14.08 / 0.624
0.274 / 14.89 / 0.621
Ours-FFHQ
0.234 / 17.16 / 0.737
0.207 / 18.07 / 0.745
Ours-SV
0.251 / 16.97 / 0.730
0.208 / 18.15 / 0.745
Ours-TP
0.293 / 16.28 / 0.708
0.266 / 17.39 / 0.714
Ours (w/o corr.)
0.234 / 17.11 / 0.735
0.205 / 18.20 / 0.744
Ours
0.225 / 17.23 / 0.740
0.193 / 18.34 / 0.747
Table 1. Ablation study. Note how our approach outperforms the
other possible design choices by a considerable margin.
4.3. Ablation Study
In this section, we analyse the importance of data and net-
work backbone in learning a good avatar prior. Addition-
ally, we validate the efficacy of fitting correction in few-shot
adaptation tasks. Results are presented in Tab. 1.
Does multi-view data help?
We answer this question by
performing few-shot adaptation on “Ours-SV” and “Ours-
6


Interpolation
Ours-SV      Ours-TP           Ours
Latent code w1
Ours-SV       Ours-TP           Ours
Ours-SV        Ours-TP            Ours
Latent code 
CEMplO2qGTSZiZKCXkA/wBt/oH7sStn+EP+B1O2ixs64ELh3Pu5R6OH3OmtG1/Wyura+sbm6Wt8vbO7t5+5eCwraJEtoiEY9k18eKciZoSzPNaTeWFIc+px1/fJv7nUcqFYvEg57E1AvxULCAEayN5Loh1iM/SJ+yfr1fqdo1ewq0TJyCVKFAs1/5cQcRSUIqNO
FYqZ5jx9pLsdSMcJqV3UTRGJMxHtKeoQKHVHnpNHOGTo0yQEkzQiNpurfixSHSk1C32zmGdWil4v/eb1EB9deykScaCrI7FGQcKQjlBeABkxSovnEwkM1kRGWGJiTY1zX0ZqDxaVjbFOIs1LJN2veZc1i7uz6uNm6KiEhzDCZyBA1fQgDtoQgsIxPACr/BmPV
v1of1OVtdsYqbI5iD9fULpsGaRw=</latexit>w2
Figure 5. Avatar generation in novel identity by interpolating latent code of two subjects. We compare the proposed approach with a
Tri-planes Backbone (TP) and with a model trained on a single view (SV), showing how we can generate higher quality renderings of
subjects and smoother interpolations.
FFHQ” (refer to Sec.4.1), both of which are trained on
single-view data, and compare with our model trained on
multi-view data (“Ours”).
The quantitative results are
shown in Tab. 1. Our method outperforms them for all met-
rics under both one-shot and five-shot settings. Qualitative
comparisons are shown in Fig. 6. Compared to “Ours-SV”
and “Ours-FFHQ”, “Ours” trained with multiview data is
more robust when head rotates and has less artifacts on the
side face, e.g. around the ear area.
Does avatar backbone help?
We conduct this compar-
ison both on our data and FFHQ dataset.
On our data,
we perform few-shot adaptation using “Ours-TP” (refer to
Sec.4.1), which replaces the backbone of our model with the
tri-planar representation [31]. On FFHQ, we directly com-
pare “Ours-FFHQ” with Next3D. Quantitative results are
shown in Tab. 1, and priors with our backbone consistently
outperform tri-plane representation on both dataset and all
metrics, showing the superiority of our backbone for avatar
prior.
Does fitting correction help?
We show a comparison in
Tab. 1 for few-shot adaptation with and without fitting cor-
rection. Jointly optimizing 3DMM fitting during adaptation
helps achieve better overall performance.
5. Conclusion
We present a novel generative 3D implicit head avatar
model using 3DMM-anchored radiance field representation
that serves as a powerful prior for few-shot adaptation of
new subjects. We demonstrate that it is particularly critical
to learn such a prior for dynamic avatar using multi-view
and multi-expression data, instead of single-view data, in
order to learn both animation and identity priors. We also
show that 3DMM-anchored neural radiance field is a more
effective backbone compared to tri-planar representation for
avatar creation through auto-decoding based on few-shot in-
puts. To overcome unsatisfactory 3DMM fitting and camera
calibration in few-shot adaptation, we showed that jointly
optimizing the parametric face model fit with generative
inverse fitting can significantly improve the performance.
7


Next3D              MonoAvatar            Ours-TP                Ours-SV            Ours-FFHQ      Ours (w/o corr.)           Ours                       GT       
(a) One-shot avatar creation
Next3D              MonoAvatar            Ours-TP                Ours-SV            Ours-FFHQ      Ours (w/o corr.)           Ours                       GT       
(b) Five-shot avatar creation
Figure 6. Qualitative comparisons of our approach against state of art methods such as Next3D [31] and MonoAvatar [4]. Additionally,
we compare our approach to alternative design choices outlined in Sec. 4. As evident from the results, our model excels in capturing facial
expressions and head poses with greater fidelity, both in one-shot (top) and five-shot (bottom) adaptation scenarios.
8


References
[1] VRChat. https://hello.vrchat.com. Accessed:
2023-02-05. 1
[2] XHolo Virtual Assitant. https://www.digalix.com/
en/virtual-assistant-augmented-reality-
xholo. Accessed: 2023-03-01. 1
[3] ShahRukh Athar, Zexiang Xu, Kalyan Sunkavalli, Eli
Shechtman, and Zhixin Shu. Rignerf: Fully controllable neu-
ral 3d portraits. In CVPR, 2022. 1, 2
[4] Ziqian Bai, Feitong Tan, Zeng Huang, Kripasindhu Sarkar,
Danhang Tang, Di Qiu, Abhimitra Meka, Ruofei Du, Ming-
song Dou, Sergio Orts-Escolano, Rohit Pandey, Ping Tan,
Thabo Beeler, Sean Fanello, and Yinda Zhang. Learning per-
sonalized high quality volumetric head avatars from monoc-
ular rgb videos. In CVPR, 2023. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 8
[5] Volker Blanz and Thomas Vetter. A morphable model for the
synthesis of 3d faces. In SIGGRAPH, 1999. 3
[6] Piotr Bojanowski, Armand Joulin, David Lopez-Paz, and
Arthur Szlam. Optimizing the latent space of generative net-
works. arXiv, 2017. 4
[7] Marcel C. B¨uhler, Kripasindhu Sarkar, Tanmay Shah,
Gengyan Li, Daoye Wang, Leonhard Helminger, Ser-
gio Orts-Escolano, Dmitry Lagun, Otmar Hilliges, Thabo
Beeler, and Abhimitra Meka. Preface: A data-driven volu-
metric prior for few-shot ultra high-resolution face synthesis.
In ICCV, 2023. 1, 2, 3
[8] Chen Cao, Tomas Simon, Jin Kyu Kim, Gabe Schwartz,
Michael Zollhoefer, Shun-Suke Saito, Stephen Lombardi,
Shih-En Wei, Danielle Belko, Shoou-I Yu, Yaser Sheikh, and
Jason Saragih. Authentic volumetric avatars from a phone
scan. ACM Transactions on Graphics, 2022. 1, 3
[9] Eric R. Chan, Marco Monteiro, Petr Kellnhofer, Jiajun Wu,
and Gordon Wetzstein.
Pi-gan: Periodic implicit genera-
tive adversarial networks for 3d-aware image synthesis. In
CVPR, 2021. 3
[10] Eric R. Chan, Connor Z. Lin, Matthew A. Chan, Koki
Nagano, Boxiao Pan, Shalini De Mello, Orazio Gallo,
Leonidas J. Guibas, Jonathan Tremblay, Sameh Khamis,
Tero Karras, and Gordon Wetzstein.
Efficient geometry-
aware 3d generative adversarial networks. In CVPR, 2022.
1, 2, 3, 5
[11] J. S. Chung, A. Nagrani, and A. Zisserman. Voxceleb2: Deep
speaker recognition. In INTERSPEECH, 2018. 2
[12] Jiankang Deng, Jia Guo, Niannan Xue, and Stefanos
Zafeiriou. Arcface: Additive angular margin loss for deep
face recognition. In CVPR, 2019. 1
[13] Yu Deng, Jiaolong Yang, Jianfeng Xiang, and Xin Tong.
Gram: Generative radiance manifolds for 3d-aware image
generation. In CVPR, 2022. 2, 3
[14] Guy Gafni, Justus Thies, Michael Zollhofer, and Matthias
Niessner. Dynamic neural radiance fields for monocular 4d
facial avatar reconstruction. In CVPR, 2021. 1, 2, 5
[15] Jiatao Gu, Lingjie Liu, Peng Wang, and Christian Theobalt.
Stylenerf:
A style-based 3d aware generator for high-
resolution image synthesis. In ICLR, 2022. 2, 3
[16] Kaiwen Guo, Peter Lincoln, Philip Davidson, Jay Busch,
Xueming Yu, Matt Whalen, Geoff Harvey, Sergio Orts-
Escolano, Rohit Pandey, Jason Dourgarian, Danhang Tang,
Anastasia Tkach, Adarsh Kowdle, Emily Cooper, Ming-
song Dou, Sean Fanello, Graham Fyffe, Christoph Rhemann,
Jonathan Taylor, Paul Debevec, and Shahram Izadi. The re-
lightables: Volumetric performance capture of humans with
realistic relighting. TOG, 2019. 1
[17] Tero Karras, Samuli Laine, and Timo Aila. A style-based
generator architecture for generative adversarial networks. In
CVPR, 2019. 2, 3, 4, 5
[18] Tero Karras, Samuli Laine, Miika Aittala, Janne Hellsten,
Jaakko Lehtinen, and Timo Aila. Analyzing and improving
the image quality of stylegan. In CVPR, 2020. 4
[19] Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for
stochastic optimization. In ICLR, 2015. 5
[20] Yushi Lan, Xuyi Meng, Shuai Yang, Chen Change Loy, and
Bo Dai. Self-supervised geometry-aware encoder for style-
based 3d gan inversion. In CVPR, 2023. 1
[21] Tianye Li, Timo Bolkart, Michael J Black, Hao Li, and Javier
Romero. Learning a model of facial shape and expression
from 4d scans. TOG, 2017. 3, 5
[22] Stephen Lombardi, Jason Saragih, Tomas Simon, and Yaser
Sheikh. Deep appearance models for face rendering. TOG,
2018. 1
[23] Abhimitra Meka, Rohit Pandey, Christian Haene, Sergio
Orts-Escolano, Peter Barnum, Philip Davidson, Daniel Er-
ickson, Yinda Zhang, Jonathan Taylor, Sofien Bouaziz,
Chloe Legendre, Wan-Chun Ma, Ryan Overbeck, Thabo
Beeler, Paul Debevec, Shahram Izadi, Christian Theobalt,
Christoph Rhemann, and Sean Fanello.
Deep relightable
textures - volumetric performance capture with neural ren-
dering. 2020. 1
[24] Marko Mihajlovic, Aayush Bansal, Michael Zollhoefer, Siyu
Tang, and Shunsuke Saito.
Keypointnerf:
Generalizing
image-based volumetric avatars using relative spatial encod-
ing of keypoints. In ECCV, 2022. 2, 3
[25] Ben Mildenhall, Pratul P Srinivasan, Matthew Tancik,
Jonathan T Barron, Ravi Ramamoorthi, and Ren Ng. Nerf:
Representing scenes as neural radiance fields for view syn-
thesis. Communications of the ACM, 2021. 1, 2, 3
[26] A. Nagrani, J. S. Chung, and A. Zisserman.
Voxceleb:
a large-scale speaker identification dataset.
In INTER-
SPEECH, 2017. 2
[27] Arsha Nagrani, Joon Son Chung, Weidi Xie, and Andrew
Zisserman. Voxceleb: Large-scale speaker verification in the
wild. Computer Science and Language, 2019. 2
[28] Sergio Orts-Escolano, Christoph Rhemann, Sean Fanello,
Wayne Chang, Adarsh Kowdle, Yury Degtyarev, David Kim,
Philip Davidson, Sameh Khamis, Mingsong Dou, Vladimir
Tankovich, Charles Loop, Qin Cai, Philip Chou, Sarah Men-
nicken, Julien Valentin, Vivek Pradeep, Shenlong Wang,
Sing Bing Kang, Pushmeet Kohli, Yuliya Lutchyn, Cem Ke-
skin, and Shahram Izadi. Holoportation: Virtual 3D Telepor-
tation in Real-Time. In Proceedings of the 29th Annual Sym-
posium on User Interface Software and Technology, 2016.
1
[29] Malte Prinzler, Otmar Hilliges, and Justus Thies.
Diner:
Depth-aware image-based neural radiance fields. In CVPR,
2023. 2, 3
9


[30] Daniel Roich, Ron Mokady, Amit H Bermano, and Daniel
Cohen-Or. Pivotal tuning for latent-based editing of real im-
ages. TOG, 2022. 2, 3, 4, 5
[31] Jingxiang Sun, Xuan Wang, Lizhen Wang, Xiaoyu Li, Yong
Zhang, Hongwen Zhang, and Yebin Liu. Next3d: Genera-
tive neural texture rasterization for 3d-aware head avatars. In
CVPR, 2023. 3, 5, 6, 7, 8, 1
[32] Alex Trevithick, Matthew Chan, Michael Stengel, Eric Chan,
Chao Liu, Zhiding Yu, Sameh Khamis, Manmohan Chan-
draker, Ravi Ramamoorthi, and Koki Nagano. Real-time ra-
diance fields for single-image portrait view synthesis. TOG,
2023. 2
[33] Zhou Wang, Alan C Bovik, Hamid R Sheikh, and Eero P Si-
moncelli. Image quality assessment: from error visibility to
structural similarity. IEEE transactions on image processing,
2004. 5
[34] Shih-En Wei, Jason Saragih, Tomas Simon, Adam W.
Harley, Stephen Lombardi, Michal Perdoch, Alexander Hy-
pes, Dawei Wang, Hernan Badino, and Yaser Sheikh. Vr fa-
cial animation via multiview image translation. TOG, 2019.
1
[35] Yue Wu, Yu Deng, Jiaolong Yang, Fangyun Wei, Qifeng
Chen, and Xin Tong. Anifacegan: Animatable 3d-aware face
image generation for video avatars. NeurIPS, 2022. 3
[36] Hongyi Xu, Guoxian Song, Zihang Jiang, Jianfeng Zhang,
Yichun Shi, Jing Liu, Wanchun Ma, Jiashi Feng, and Linjie
Luo.
Omniavatar: Geometry-guided controllable 3d head
synthesis. In CVPR, 2023. 3
[37] Richard Zhang, Phillip Isola, Alexei A. Efros, Eli Shecht-
man, and Oliver Wang. The unreasonable effectiveness of
deep features as a perceptual metric. In CVPR, 2018. 5
10
