Title: Disentangled clothed avatar generation with layered representation

Disentangled Clothed Avatar Generation with Layered Representation
Weitian Zhang1
Yichao Yan1†
Sijing Wu1
Manwen Liao2
Xiaokang Yang1
1 MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2The University of Hong Kong
1{weitianzhang, yanyichao, wusijing, xkyang}@sjtu.edu.cn
2{manwen}@connect.hku.hk
(a) Disentangled Clothed Avatar Generation
(b) Animation
(e) Component Transfer
(c) Camera View Control
(d) Decomposition
Figure 1. We propose LayerAvatar to efficiently generate diverse clothed avatars with components fully disentangled. The generated
avatars can be animated and synthesized in novel views. They can also be decomposed into body, hair, and clothes for component transfer.
Abstract
Clothed avatar generation has wide applications in vir-
tual and augmented reality, filmmaking, and more. While
existing methods have made progress in creating animat-
able digital avatars, generating avatars with disentangled
components (e.g., body, hair, and clothes) has long been a
challenge. In this paper, we propose LayerAvatar, a novel
feed-forward diffusion-based method capable of generat-
ing high-quality component-disentangled clothed avatars
in seconds. We propose a layered UV feature plane rep-
resentation, where components are distributed in different
layers of the Gaussian-based UV feature plane with cor-
responding semantic labels.
This representation can be
effectively learned with current feed-forward generation
pipelines, facilitating component disentanglement and en-
† Corresponding author.
hancing details of generated avatars. Based on the well-
designed representation, we train a single-stage diffusion
model and introduce constrain terms to mitigate the severe
occlusion issue of the innermost human body layer. Ex-
tensive experiments demonstrate the superior performances
of our method in generating highly detailed and disentan-
gled clothed avatars. In addition, we explore its applica-
tions in component transfer. The project page is available
at https://olivia23333.github.io/LayerAvatar.
1. Introduction
The creation of digital avatars has various applications [2,
13] in virtual and augmented reality, filmmaking, and more.
Traditional graphics-based pipelines require extensive ef-
fort from 3D artists to construct a single digital avatar. To
reduce tedious manual labor and facilitate mass production,
learning-based methods aiming at generating digital avatars
arXiv:2501.04631v2  [cs.CV]  4 Sep 2025


automatically have been widely explored recently.
Recent learning-based methods [3, 16, 84] mainly com-
bine 3D representations [30, 45, 62, 71] with generation
pipelines (e.g., 3D-aware GANs [4, 5, 49] and diffusion
models [53, 58]) to create digital avatars. However, most of
these methods often ignore the compositional nature of dig-
ital avatars and represent the human body, hair, and clothes
as a whole, which limits their capabilities in digital avatar
customization such as cloth transfer. Neural-ABC [7] and
SMPLicit [14] provide parametric model with disentangled
clothes and human body. However, modeling texture are
leaved an un-explored problem. HumanLiff [24] proposes
a layer-wise generation process that first generates clothed
avatars in minimal clothes, then generates digital avatars
wearing the next layer of clothing conditioned on the cur-
rent layer. Nevertheless, the human body and clothes are not
fully disentangled, which makes it difficult to extract the
components of each layer, thus reducing the editing abil-
ity. In addition, some methods [15, 19, 66, 70, 73] fol-
low the trend of DreamFusion [55] to achieve disentangled
clothed avatar generation by learning each component of
digital avatars separately through the prior knowledge of
2D diffusion models [58] in an optimization manner. These
methods can generate clothed avatars with each component
disentangled, however, they take hours to generate a single
digital avatar, and the optimization time will increase lin-
early according to the number of components.
In this paper, we propose LayerAvatar, a novel feed-
forward diffusion-based method that achieves (1) compo-
nent disentanglement, enabling seamless transfer of individ-
ual components such as clothes, hair, and shoes; (2) high-
quality results, with generated avatars exhibiting intricate
facial details, distinct fingers, and realistic cloth wrinkles;
and (3) efficiency, requiring only seconds to generate a sin-
gle avatar. We choose 3D Gaussians [30] as the underly-
ing representation due to its high-quality rendering results
for intricate details, and strong representation capability for
diverse cloth types. However, naively representing the dis-
entangled clothed avatar using 3D Gaussians is impractical
due to its unstructured nature that is incompatible with most
current feed-forward generation pipelines [5, 58]. There-
fore, we introduce a Gaussian-based UV feature plane, in
which 3D Gaussians are projected into a predefined 2D
UV space shared among subjects. The attributes of each
3D Gaussian are encoded as local geometry and texture la-
tent features, which can be obtained from the 2D feature
plane via bilinear interpolation. Furthermore, to achieve
full disentanglement of avatar components (hair, shoes, up-
per cloth) and higher generation quality, we represent avatar
components in separate layers of the UV feature plane
which provides neighboring components with distinctive
features from different layers to facilitate decomposition.
To generate the layered representation in a feed-forward
manner, we elaborately train a single-stage diffusion model
[6] from multi-view 2D images. To fully disentangle each
component and ensure plausible avatar generation results,
we employ supervision both in the individual components
and the entire compositional clothed avatar. Moreover, sev-
eral prior losses are utilized to constrain the smooth surface
and reasonable color of the severely occluded human body.
We evaluate LayerAvatar on multiple datasets [9, 21, 81],
demonstrating its superior performance in generating disen-
tangled avatars. We also explore its application in compo-
nent transfer. In summary, our main contributions are:
• We introduce LayerAvatar, a novel feed-forward clothed
avatar generation pipeline with each component disentan-
gled, enhancing the controllability of avatar generation.
• We propose a layered UV feature plane representation
that enhances generation quality and facilitates the dis-
entanglement of each component.
• Our method achieves outstanding generation results on
multiple datasets and support downstream applications
such as component transfer.
2. Related work
Diffusion in 3D Generation.
Encouraged by the suc-
cess of diffusion model [58] in 2D image generation
area, researchers have attempted to extend it to 3D gen-
eration tasks.
These works can be divided into two
categories, feed-forward and optimization-based methods.
Optimization-based methods [8, 37, 38, 55, 56, 68, 74],
represented by DreamFusion [55], utilize SDS loss to dis-
till prior knowledge of 2D diffusion model to supervise
3D scenes. These methods often suffer from oversatura-
tion and Janus problems. Thus, improved SDS loss [74]
and camera-conditional [40] or multi-view diffusion mod-
els [63] are introduced to mitigate these problems. More-
over, optimization-based methods usually take hours to gen-
erate a single object, which hinders its application in real
life. On the other hand, feed-forward methods [42, 76, 82,
85, 89] directly learn diffusion model for 3D representa-
tions, such as points [48, 83], voxels [57], meshes [42, 79],
and implicit neural representations [23, 47, 64].
These
methods can generate 3D objects in seconds. Several at-
tempts [12, 26, 86, 87] have been made to adapt them to the
field of digital human generation. Different from most pre-
vious works, we regard digital avatars as a composition of
multiple components instead of a unified whole and learn a
diffusion model on the proposed layered representation.
Clothed Avatar Generation. Inspired by general 3D ob-
ject generation, many methods [3, 12, 16, 22, 50, 88] in-
troduce 3D-aware GANs [5] and diffusion models [58] for
clothed avatar generation. These methods first learn clothed
avatars in canonical space and then animate them to posed
space using a deformation module. Following EG3D [5],
some methods [84, 88] apply triplane features to represent


Denoising U-Net
!
Attribute Maps
Add Gaussian Noise
!# = α " !$ + σ " ϵ
Disentangled Clothed Avatar 
Diffusion Model
Canonical Space Pose Space
Layered UV Feature Plane Fitting
Layered UV 
Feature Plane
Noisy Layered UV 
Feature Plane
Multi-view images supervision for RGB & Mask
Reconstruction Loss
Clothed 
Avatar
Human 
Body
Exterior
Components
Segmentation 
mask
Constraint Loss
Figure 2. Method overview. LayerAvatar learns a feed-forward diffusion model to generate clothed avatars with each component disentan-
gled. The clothed avatars are represented as layered UV feature plane where components are represented separately. After decoding the
feature plane into attribute maps, we can extract 3D Gaussians from them through SMPL-X-based templates. Generated clothed avatars
are then transformed into targeted pose space for further supervision. Reconstruction loss and constraint loss are both utilized to facilitate
the disentanglement and handle the severe occlusion of human body layer.
clothed avatars for higher quality and utilize inverse skin-
ning for animation. AG3D [16] introduces forward skinning
technique [10, 11] to achieve robust animation including
loose clothing. On the other hand, Chupa [32] and Avatar-
Popup [34] apply diffusion models to learn front and back
view image pairs and then lift them to 3D space. Despite
their impressive success, most of these methods represent
clothed avatars as an entity and fail to disentangle the hu-
man body and clothes. Recently, some optimization-based
methods [15, 19] achieved success in generating cloth-
disentangled avatars, however, the generating process takes
hours to generate a single avatar.
Compositional Avatar Representation. Instead of repre-
senting avatars [46, 75, 80] as a single entity, some methods
represent clothed avatars as a combination of multiple sub-
modules. COAP [44], Spams [51] and DANBO [65] con-
sider human avatars as a composition of body parts, while
EVA3D [22] and ENARF-GAN [50] follow this trend and
utilize multiple neural networks to represent different body
parts of the digital avatar, achieving more efficient and de-
tailed generation results. Several methods [1, 24, 78] rep-
resent clothed avatars as separate layers to enable the ex-
pressiveness of various topologies. However, these meth-
ods ignore the disentanglement of human body and clothes,
which makes each submodule less physically meaningful.
Recently, some works [18, 39, 54, 77, 90] disentangle the
human body and clothes by representing each component
separately.
During the rendering process, these compo-
nents are combined through various compositional render-
ing techniques. Most of these methods are designed to op-
timize a single digital avatar. In this paper, we propose a
novel layered UV feature plane representation that is com-
patible with feed-forward generation framework.
3. Method
We propose LayerAvatar, a feed-forward generative method
for disentangled clothed avatar generation. The overview
of our method is illustrated in Fig. 2. We provide a brief
introduction for prior knowledge in Sec. 3.1. To achieve
disentangled clothed avatar generation, we propose a novel
layered UV feature plane representation (Sec. 3.2), which
facilitates disentanglement and is compatible with current
feed-forward generative pipelines. The clothed avatars are
generated in canonical space and then deformed to targeted
pose space via deformation module (Sec. 3.3). The training
process is introduced in Sec. 3.4.
3.1. Preliminary
SMPL-X [52] is an expressive parametric human model
that can produce naked human meshes M(β, θ, ψ) given
shape parameter β, pose parameter θ, and expression pa-


rameter ψ. The producing process can be formulated as:
T(β, θ, ψ) = Tc + Bs(β; s) + Be(ψ; e) + Bp(θ; p),
M(β, θ, ψ) = LBS(T(β, θ, ψ)), J(β), θ, W),
(1)
where a canonical human mesh T is first calculated as a
combination of the mean shape template Tc and vertex dis-
placements (Bs(β; s), Be(ψ; e), Bp(θ; p)) computed by the
blend shapes s, e, p and their corresponding pose, shape,
and expression parameters. The body template T is then
deformed to the given pose by linear blend skinning(LBS)
based on the skinning weights W and joint locations J(β).
3D Gaussians [30] is a primitive-based explicit represen-
tation that combines the strengths of both previous explicit
and implicit representations. It consists of a set of learn-
able 3D Gaussian primitive Gk where each contains five at-
tributes: position µ, scaling matrix S, rotation matrix R,
opacity α, and color c. In practice, we employ diagonal
vector s ∈R3 and axis-angle r ∈R3 to represent S and
R respectively. 3D Gaussians are represented as ellipses
in 3D space defined by their position µ and covariance ma-
trix Σ = RSST RT . During the rendering process, these
3D Gaussians are projected to a 2D image plane where the
pixel color C can be calculated as follows:
C =
N
X
i=1
ciσi
i−1
Y
j=1
(1 −σj) ,
(2)
where ci is the color of the i-th 3D Gaussian on the ray, and
σi is the blending weight calculated with the opacity α.
3.2. Layered UV Feature Plane Representation
Previous methods mainly represent avatars as a single entity
or depend on optimization-based schemes. As a result, the
generated results often have difficulty with editing or are
slow to create, typically taking hours to generate a single
subject. To address these limitations, we propose a layered
UV feature plane representation that can separate compo-
nents of clothed avatars and is compatible with fast, feed-
forward generation pipelines. We employ 3D Gaussians as
the base representation for efficient rendering along with
easy animation and editing.
To enable disentanglement, we consider clothed avatars
as a composition of human body and exterior components.
Gavatar = {Gbody, Gtop, Gbottom, Ghair, Gshoes}.
(3)
Each component is represented as a set of Gaussian prim-
itives Gi parameterized with five attributes: 3D position
µi ∈R3, opacity αi ∈R, rotation matrix Ri represented by
axis angle ri ∈R3, scale matrix Si represented by diagonal
vector si ∈R3 and rgb color ci ∈R3. Inspired by exist-
ing works [25, 87] that initialize 3D Gaussians by attach-
ing them to SMPL parametric model for geometry and ani-
mation prior. We initialize the 3D Gaussians of each com-
ponent by attaching them to self-designed templates based
on SMPL-X. For each component, we design a template
that maximizes coverage of the region where the component
may exist. To enhance generation quality, all templates are
subdivided to support densified Gaussian primitives. Then,
we initialize the positions of 3D Gaussians as the center
points of faces on the densified template mesh. And the ini-
tial rotations of 3D Gaussians are set as the tangent frame of
the faces, which consists of the normal vector of that face,
the direction vector of one edge and their cross product.
For
compatibility
with
feed-forward
generation
pipelines, previous methods typically project 3D Gaussians
into 2D space (e.g., multi-view image space [67, 69], UV
space [87]).
Unlike these methods, which represent the
entire subject as a single entity and then employ a post-
processing step for disentanglement, we directly model
components separately by mapping their templates into a
three-layer UV space, combined with semantic labels. The
first layer represents the innermost part of the human body,
the second layer represents the hair and shoes, and the
third layer represents top and bottom clothes. Following
[87], all Gaussian attributes are stored as local UV features
to enhance generation quality. The UV features plane is
first split into two parts in a channel-wise manner and
then decoded by two light-weight shared MLP decoders
Dg and Dt separately. Dg decodes the geometry-related
attributes: position offset ∆µ and opacity α of 3D Gaus-
sians and Dt predicts texture-related attributes, color c and
covariance-related rotation ∆r and scale ∆s.
Given the
decoded attribute maps, we can extract the attributes for
each 3D Gaussian Gi via bilinear interpolation. The opacity
value αi and color value ci are obtained directly, and the
other values are obtained via following formula based on
their initial values:
µi = µ0
i + ∆µi,
si = s0
i · ∆si,
ri = r0
i · ∆ri,
(4)
where µ0
i , s0
i , and r0
i are initial position, scale, and rota-
tion values for 3D Gaussians, respectively. ∆µi, ∆si and
∆ri are predicted residuals extracted from attribute maps.
By collecting the attributes of 3D Gaussians with the same
semantic label, we can obtain a canonical space represen-
tation of each component, and their composition forms the
complete disentangled clothed digital avatar.
3.3. Deformation
Benefiting from the SMPL-X-based templates, our method
supports deformation in body shapes and novel poses in-
cluding gestures and facial expressions. To support training
with multiple subjects in various body shapes, we disentan-
gle the body shape factor by defining all the templates in
a canonical space with neutral body shapes. The neutral
body shape avatar and its corresponding components can be
transformed into targeted body shape space via the follow-


ing warping process:
¯µ = µ + Bs(β, s, µ),
(5)
where ¯µ represents the position of 3D Gaussians in the tar-
geted β body shape space and Bs(β, s, µ) are correspond-
ing body shape related offsets extracted from the SMPL-X
based templates via barycentric interpolation. We further
add pose-dependent offsets Bp(θ, p, µ) and facial expres-
sion offsets Be(ψ, e, µ) in the same way to ensure accurate
animation results.
The animation of a generated avatar from the canonical
T-pose to an arbitrary target pose can be regarded as trans-
forming the 3D Gaussian attributes. During the animation
process, the opacity α and color c of 3D Gaussians remain
unchanged. Therefore, we only discuss the transformation
of position µ, rotation matrix R and scale matrix S in this
section. Using the LBS function, we can transform the po-
sition ¯µ of 3D Gaussians as:
µ′ =
nb
X
i=1
wiBi ¯µ,
(6)
where nb represents the number of joints and Bi is the trans-
formation matrix of the i-th joint. For 3D Gaussians on
the innermost human body layer, the corresponding blend
skinning weights w are obtained directly from SMPL-X-
based templates through barycentric interpolation, as these
regions usually undergo minimal topology changes. For 3D
Gaussians representing the exterior components, we follow
[16] to extract the skinning weights from a pre-computed
low-resolution volumetric field of fused skinning weights,
which is more stable for points that deviate significantly
from the original template. T = Pnb
i=1 wiBi is the blended
transformation matrix, and the rotation matrix R is updated
via R′ = T1:3,1:3R, where T1:3,1:3 is the rotational part of
T. The scale matrix S is recalculated in the targeted pose
space to fit deformed topology.
3.4. Learning Disentangled Clothed Avatar
To mitigate the impact of occlusion, we adopt a single-stage
training scheme [6], which is more robust in occluded and
sparse view situations. Specifically, the layered UV fea-
ture plane fitting and diffusion training process is conducted
simultaneously, and the UV feature plane is jointly opti-
mized by the fitting and diffusion loss. Similar to the SDS
loss [55], the diffusion loss provides a diffusion prior for
the UV feature plane, thereby facilitating the completion of
unseen regions in the training images.
Layered UV Feature Plane Fitting. Given multi-view im-
ages, we optimize the layered UV feature plane and shared
decoders to reconstruct avatars with disentangled compo-
nents. The objective function can be divided into recon-
struction and constraint part. The reconstruction loss Lrecon
can be formulated as follows:
Lrecon = λcolor ·Lcolor +λmask ·Lmask +λper ·Lper +λseg ·Lseg.
(7)
To achieve the disentanglement between exterior compo-
nents and human body, we not only minimize the color loss
Lcolor and mask loss Lmask on the overall rendering result,
but also perform supervision on each component. Specif-
ically, we first render the 3D Gaussians corresponding to
each component separately to obtain multi-view images of
each component. Then, inspired by Clothedreamer [41], in-
stead of blending the rendering results of these components
via estimated depth order to obtain the rendering results of
clothed avatars, we directly render all the 3D Gaussians to
alleviate artifacts caused by the blending process. The sil-
houette masks of each component and the clothed avatar are
obtained similarly. The ground truth of silhouette masks is
estimated based on the semantic segmentation results pre-
dicted by Sapiens [31]. We apply Huber loss [27] for both
Lcolor and Lmask following SCARF [18], due to its robust-
ness to the estimated noisy segmentation results. To en-
hance the details of generated results, we also employ a per-
ceptual loss Lper [29] to minimize the difference between
extracted features of rendered outputs and targeted images.
Components in overlapping regions may learn inverted
color or opacity values due to incorrect depth ordering. To
address this, we render semantic segmentation maps of the
clothed avatar by assigning the segmentation label of each
Gaussian as its color. We then minimize the distance to the
predicted semantic segmentation map using the Huber loss,
Lseg, to encourage accurate depth ordering.
Due to the severe occlusion of the inner human body
layer, we apply constraints on the geometry and texture of
the human body to obtain reasonable results. Since the hu-
man body is always within the exterior layer, we employ the
following constraints:
Lmaskin = λmaskinReLU
 Rb
m(Gbody) −Mfg

,
(8)
where Rb
m(Gbody) represents the rendered silhouette of the
human body, and Mfg is the estimated foreground silhouette
mask. When rendering Rb
m(Gbody), we detach the opac-
ity values and set them to 1, only optimizing offset and
covariance-related attributes, preventing the model from
minimizing the loss via decreasing opacity on the bound-
ary. Utilizing the prior that the occluded skin color should
be similar to the color of hands, we introduce the following
texture constraint:
Lskin = λskin
 Moc ⊙
 Rb
m(Gbody) −Cskin

,
(9)
where Cskin is the average color of pixels in the hands re-
gion and Moc is the mask of the occluded region. Other
regularization terms are as follows:
Lreg = λoffsetLoffset + λsmoothLsmooth.
(10)


Loffset = ∥∆µ∥2 constrains the offset from being extremely
large. Lsmooth is the total variational (TV) loss, which is
used to minimize the average L2 distance between neigh-
boring pixels on attribute maps. This regularization term
encourages smooth transitions between the neighboring at-
tributes (e.g. offsets, rotation, and opacity), promoting the
generation of reasonable texture and geometry surface.
Disentangled Clothed Avatar Diffusion Model. To gener-
ate disentangled clothed avatars, we train a diffusion model
that maps Gaussian noise to the layered UV latent space.
Since diffusion models generally perform better on inputs
with low channel dimensions [59], we concatenate our lay-
ered UV feature plane across widths instead of stacking
them across channels. During training, we first obtain de-
structed UV feature plane xt by adding Gaussian noise
ϵ ∼N(0, I) to the layered UV feature plane x0 according
to following noise schedule:
xt := α(t)x0 + σ(t)ϵ,
(11)
where α(t) and σ(t) are predefined functions that control
the intensity of added noise, and t is the time step in the
range of [0, 1]. To stabilize and accelerate training, we use
v-prediction proposed in [61] to train the denoising UNet.
The objective function for the diffusion model is:
Ldiff =
E
t,x0,ϵ
1
2w(t) ∥ˆx0 −x0∥2

,
(12)
where w(t) = (α(t)/σ(t))2ω, the ω is set to 0.5 following
[6]. Ldiff is used to update not only the parameters of de-
noising UNet, but also the UV feature plane. It promotes
the UV feature plane to adapt to the learned latent space,
thereby providing priors for occluded regions.
4. Experiments
Baselines. To evaluate holistic generation quality, we com-
pare our method with the state-of-the-art methods of ani-
matable avatar generation (EVA3D [22], StructLDM [26],
and E3Gen [87]) on THuman2.0 [81] dataset.
We
then evaluate the decomposition capability of our method
by comparing the layer-wise generation results with the
disentanglement-related method HumanLiff [24] on Tight-
cap [9] dataset.
And we further evaluate the compo-
nent generation quality against optimization-based meth-
ods: LAGA [19], SO-SMPL [70], and TELA [15]. Our
method is trained on a composite dataset including Cus-
tomHuman [21], THuman2.0 [81], and THuman2.1 [81].
Metrics. For holistic generation quality evaluation, we uti-
lize FID [20] following previous works [5, 26, 87]. For
layer-wise generation results, we adopt FID for overall gen-
eration quality evaluation and L-PSNR [24] for disentangle-
ment capability evaluation, which calculates the PSNR be-
tween two layers with the adding component masked. Ad-
ditionally, we conduct a user study with 20 participants to
compare the generation quality and disentanglement quality
of our methods with optimization-based methods.
Dataset. For THuman2.0 [81], we sample 500 scans and
render each from 54 camera views to obtain multi-view im-
ages. Then, we employ Sapiens [31] to estimate segmen-
tation masks for these images, from which per-component
silhouette masks can be extracted. This approach enables
our method to learn directly from multi-view images with-
out requiring separate meshes of each component, thereby
simplifying the data collection process. Tightcap [9] con-
tains 3D scans with separate meshes for cloth and shoe,
which facilitates direct rendering of multi-view images and
silhouette masks for each component. For a fair compari-
son, we use the preprocessed version provided by Human-
Liff [24], which selects 107 samples from Tightcap. Each
sample is rendered from 158 camera views, providing im-
ages and silhouette masks for both the entire avatar and each
component. We also construct a composite dataset consist-
ing of 1954 selected scans from THuman2.0 [81], THu-
man2.1 [81], and CustomHuman [21] datasets. Each scan
is processed in the same way as the THuman2.0 data. Ad-
ditionally, all SMPL-X parametric models are standardized
to neutral gender with refinement in body shape parameters
to ensure the body layer fits underneath the cloth surface.
4.1. Evaluation of Generation Quality and Disen-
tanglement Capability
Disentanglement and Animation Capacities.
The dis-
entanglement and animation results are shown in Fig. 1.
Our method successfully generates clothed avatars with full
disentanglement of components such as hair, shoes, and
clothes from the human body. Moreover, our method recon-
structs the inner body layer with reasonable geometry and
texture under severe occlusion. Benefiting from the SMPL-
X-based templates within our layered Gaussian-based UV
feature plane representation, each component can be easily
deformed into novel poses.
Comparisons. For holistic generation quality, we compare
our method against representative feed-forward diffusion
and 3D-aware GAN pipelines. The quantitative compari-
son results are shown in Tab. 1a. Our method outperforms
all baselines on THuman2.0 [81] dataset, achieving the best
FID score. The visual comparisons shown in Fig. 3 fur-
ther enhance the superiority of our method. EVA3D [22]
struggles with generating digital avatars with plausible tex-
ture and geometry.
Compared to StructLDM [26] and
E3Gen [87], our method exhibits finer details, such as dis-
tinctive fingers, realistic cloth wrinkles, and intricate faces.
To evaluate disentanglement capability, we compare
layer-wise generation results and disentangled avatar gen-
eration results of our method with state-of-the-art meth-
ods. For layer-wise generation, our method surpasses other
methods in both FID and L-PSNR, as shown in Tab. 1b,


Methods
FID↓
EVA3D [22]
124.54†
StructLDM [26]
25.22†
E3Gen [87]
15.78⋆
Ours
12.50
(a) Holistic Generation Quality.
Methods
FID↓
L-PSNR↑
EVA3D [22]
61.58*
<20*
Rodin [72]
56.57*
18.12*
HumanLiff [24]
54.39*
28.57*
Ours
17.37
>40
(b) Layer-wise Generation Quality.
Methods
Disentanglement↑
Quality↑
Time↓
SO-SMPL [70]
13.02
3.57/8.57
5h
LAGA [19]
9.77
5.00/1.43
1.5h
TELA [15]
19.07
14.29/8.57
6h
Ours
58.14
77.14/81.43
2s
(c) Component Quality and Disentanglement Evaluation.
Table 1. Quantitative comparison. Our method outperforms other methods in both holistic and layer-wise generation quality, as well as
disentanglement capability. Due to the minor difference between the two masked layers, the L-PSNR value of our method is so large that
we use > 40 to express it. For component comparison, we show the quality preference in component quality preference/overall quality
preference format. ∗, † and ⋆denote results adopted from HumanLiff [24], StructLDM [26] and E3Gen [87] respectively.
Figure 3. Qualitative comparison. The left part demonstrates our generation results on THuman2.0 dataset [81]. The middle part illustrates
layer-wise generated results on Tightcap dataset [9]. Our method can generate more reasonable human bodies under severe occluded
scenarios. The right part exhibits our component generation results compared with optimization-based methods.
which indicates that our method achieves higher holistic
generation results and can generate disentangled avatars
without facing the identity shifting problem.
The elim-
ination of identity shifting demonstrates that our method
achieves full disentanglement of components, since entan-
gled components will result in shifting problems. As shown
in Fig. 3, Rodin [72] struggles to maintain identity con-
sistency during the generation process. Although Human-
Liff [24] achieves correct layer-wise generation, it produces
less smooth body geometry and exhibits subtle identity
shifting, shown by the enlarged face region. Our method
can generate each layer without shifting problems, demon-
strating more complete disentanglement.
For disentangled avatar generation, we compare our
method with state-of-the-art optimization-based methods.
As shown in Tab. 1c, our method generates clothed avatars
in significantly less time and achieves a higher user pref-
erence. Qualitative comparisons are illustrated in Fig. 3.
SO-SMPL [70] generates unrealistic, cartoonish colors and
exhibits unnatural sawtooth on the border of generated com-
Methods
FID↓
KID ↓
Two-stage
19.06
15.40
Pipeline (SLMO)
30.83
30.18
Pipeline (SLMN)
28.95
29.21
Full pipeline
12.50
9.39
Table 2. Ablation study on THuman2.0 Dataset. The full pipeline
outperforms baselines on both FID and KID by a large margin.
ponents (highlighted by orange circles). LAGA [19] and
TELA [15] struggle with blurry fingers, oversaturated col-
ors, and incomplete disentanglement from the body layer.
In contrast, our method generates fully disentangled avatars
with distinctive fingers and realistic color.
4.2. Ablation Study
Layered vs. Single-Layer Representation.
To demonstrate the effectiveness of our layered UV fea-
ture plane, we design two baselines that use single-layer
UV feature plane to generate disentangled clothed avatars.


Ours
Two Stage
SLMO
SLMN
Figure 4. Ablation study on THuman2.0 Dataset. Comparing ran-
domly generated avatars and decomposition results, our method
generates avatars with higher quality and better disentanglement.
One baseline representation is SLMO (single-layer-multi-
output), which utilizes a single pair of geometry and texture
decoders (Dg and Dt) to predict attributes for all compo-
nents. Another one is SLMN (single-layer multi-network),
which employs different decoders to predict the attributes of
Gaussian primitives for each component. Since they only
contain a single-layer UV feature plane, attributes of dif-
ferent components will share one feature if they are initial-
ized in the same location. As shown in Fig. 4, Fig.5 and
Tab. 2, single-layer UV representations generate clothed
avatars with lower quality both quantitatively and qualita-
tively. This is because our layered UV feature plane repre-
sentation provides each component with an optimized UV
distribution and independent feature space.
Without the
layered UV plane, which provides distinctive features for
components in overlapping and neighboring regions, single-
layer representations struggle to disentangle components,
leading to blurred boundaries between components.
Single Stage vs. Two Stage. We also compare the single-
stage training scheme with the commonly used two-stage
training scheme, shown in Tab. 2 and Fig. 4. The single-
stage training can generate avatars with finer details, such
as intricate faces.
4.3. Applications
Component Transfer.
We further explore applications
such as component transfer. Thanks to the component dis-
entanglement and shared structure provided by our method,
we can directly transfer clothes and other components be-
E3Gen
Ours
Figure 5. Zoom in comparison between E3Gen and LayerAvatar.
Compared to single-layer representation, layered representation
exhibits detailed faces and clear boundaries between components.
Figure 6. Component transfer. Given the generated avatars in the
first column, we can transfer the upper-clothes, pants, hair, and
shoes of the avatars in the second to fifth column to them. The
results are shown in the rightmost column.
tween generated samples. The component transfer results
are shown in Fig. 6. Our method can accurately transfer
components across various body shapes while maintaining
high-quality details of the transferred items.
5. Conclusion
In this paper, we propose LayerAvatar, a novel feed-
forward diffusion-based method for generating component-
disentangled clothed avatars. Our method proposes a lay-
ered UV feature plane representation, which organizes 3D
Gaussians into different layers, each corresponding to spe-
cific components of clothed avatars (e.g., body, hair, cloth-
ing). Leveraging this representation, we train a single-stage
diffusion model to generate each feature plane, enabling the
generation of fully disentangled clothed avatars. To ensure
complete component disentanglement, we incorporate con-
straint terms into the model. Extensive experiments validate
the superiority of LayerAvatar in generating fully disen-
tangled clothed avatars and its effectiveness in component
transfer tasks. Additional limitations and implementation
details are discussed in the supplementary material.


Acknowledgments.
This work was supported in part by
NSFC (62201342), and Shanghai Municipal Science and
Technology Major Project (2021SHZDZX0102).
References
[1] Rameen Abdal, Wang Yifan, Zifan Shi, Yinghao Xu, Ryan
Po, Zhengfei Kuang, Qifeng Chen, Dit-Yan Yeung, and Gor-
don Wetzstein. Gaussian shell maps for efficient 3d human
generation, 2023. 3
[2] Timur Bagautdinov, Chenglei Wu, Tomas Simon, Fabi´an
Prada, Takaaki Shiratori, Shih-En Wei, Weipeng Xu, Yaser
Sheikh, and Jason Saragih. Driving-signal aware full-body
avatars. ACM Trans. Graph., 40(4), 2021. 1
[3] Alexander W. Bergman, Petr Kellnhofer, Wang Yifan,
Eric R. Chan, David B. Lindell, and Gordon Wetzstein. Gen-
erative neural articulated radiance fields. In NeurIPS, 2022.
2
[4] Eric Chan, Marco Monteiro, Petr Kellnhofer, Jiajun Wu, and
Gordon Wetzstein. pi-gan: Periodic implicit generative ad-
versarial networks for 3d-aware image synthesis. In Proc.
CVPR, 2021. 2
[5] Eric R. Chan, Connor Z. Lin, Matthew A. Chan, Koki
Nagano, Boxiao Pan, Shalini De Mello, Orazio Gallo,
Leonidas Guibas, Jonathan Tremblay, Sameh Khamis, Tero
Karras, and Gordon Wetzstein. Efficient geometry-aware 3D
generative adversarial networks. In CVPR, 2022. 2, 6
[6] Hansheng Chen, Jiatao Gu, Anpei Chen, Wei Tian, Zhuowen
Tu, Lingjie Liu, and Hao Su. Single-stage diffusion nerf:
A unified approach to 3d generation and reconstruction. In
ICCV, 2023. 2, 5, 6
[7] Honghu Chen, Yuxin Yao, and Juyong Zhang. Neural-abc:
Neural parametric models for articulated body with clothes.
IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics,
2024. 2
[8] Rui Chen, Yongwei Chen, Ningxin Jiao, and Kui Jia. Fan-
tasia3d: Disentangling geometry and appearance for high-
quality text-to-3d content creation.
In Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision
(ICCV), pages 22246–22256, 2023. 2
[9] Xin Chen, Anqi Pang, Yang Wei, Wang Peihao, Lan Xu, and
Jingyi Yu. Tightcap: 3d human shape capture with clothing
tightness field. ACM Transactions on Graphics (Presented
at ACM SIGGRAPH), 2021. 2, 6, 7
[10] Xu Chen, Yufeng Zheng, Michael J Black, Otmar Hilliges,
and Andreas Geiger. Snarf: Differentiable forward skinning
for animating non-rigid neural implicit shapes. In Interna-
tional Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), 2021. 3
[11] Xu Chen, Tianjian Jiang, Jie Song, Max Rietmann, Andreas
Geiger, Michael J. Black, and Otmar Hilliges. Fast-snarf: A
fast deformer for articulated neural fields. Pattern Analysis
and Machine Intelligence (PAMI), 2023. 3
[12] Zhaoxi Chen, Fangzhou Hong, Haiyi Mei, Guangcong
Wang, Lei Yang, and Ziwei Liu. Primdiffusion: Volumet-
ric primitives diffusion for 3d human generation. In Thirty-
seventh Conference on Neural Information Processing Sys-
tems, 2023. 2
[13] Hang Chu, Shugao Ma, Fernando De la Torre, Sanja Fi-
dler, and Yaser Sheikh. Expressive telepresence via mod-
ular codec avatars. In Computer Vision–ECCV 2020: 16th
European Conference, Glasgow, UK, August 23–28, 2020,
Proceedings, Part XII 16, pages 330–345. Springer, 2020. 1
[14] Enric Corona, Albert Pumarola, Guillem Aleny`a, Ger-
ard Pons-Moll, and Francesc Moreno-Noguer.
Smplicit:
Topology-aware generative model for clothed people.
In
CVPR, 2021. 2
[15] Junting Dong, Qi Fang, Zehuan Huang, Xudong Xu,
Jingbo Wang, Sida Peng, and Bo Dai.
Tela:
Text to
layer-wise 3d clothed human generation.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2404.16748, 2024. 2, 3, 6, 7
[16] Zijian Dong, Xu Chen, Jinlong Yang, Michael J Black, Ot-
mar Hilliges, and Andreas Geiger. AG3D: Learning to Gen-
erate 3D Avatars from 2D Image Collections. In Interna-
tional Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), 2023. 2, 3,
5
[17] Stefan Elfwing, Eiji Uchibe, and Kenji Doya.
Sigmoid-
weighted linear units for neural network function approxima-
tion in reinforcement learning. Neural networks, 107:3–11,
2018. 1
[18] Yao Feng, Jinlong Yang, Marc Pollefeys, Michael J. Black,
and Timo Bolkart.
Capturing and animation of body and
clothing from monocular video. In SIGGRAPH Asia 2022
Conference Papers, 2022. 3, 5
[19] Jia Gong, Shenyu Ji, Lin Geng Foo, Kang Chen, Hossein
Rahmani, and Jun Liu.
Laga: Layered 3d avatar genera-
tion and customization via gaussian splatting. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2405.12663, 2024. 2, 3, 6, 7
[20] Martin Heusel, Hubert Ramsauer, Thomas Unterthiner,
Bernhard Nessler, and Sepp Hochreiter. Gans trained by a
two time-scale update rule converge to a local nash equilib-
rium. Advances in neural information processing systems,
30, 2017. 6
[21] Hsuan-I Ho, Lixin Xue, Jie Song, and Otmar Hilliges. Learn-
ing locally editable virtual humans.
In Proceedings of
the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, pages 21024–21035, 2023. 2, 6
[22] Fangzhou Hong, Zhaoxi Chen, Yushi LAN, Liang Pan, and
Ziwei Liu.
EVA3d: Compositional 3d human generation
from 2d image collections. In International Conference on
Learning Representations, 2023. 2, 3, 6, 7
[23] Fangzhou Hong, Jiaxiang Tang, Ziang Cao, Min Shi, Tong
Wu, Zhaoxi Chen, Shuai Yang, Tengfei Wang, Liang Pan,
Dahua Lin, et al.
3dtopia:
Large text-to-3d genera-
tion model with hybrid diffusion priors.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2403.02234, 2024. 2
[24] Shoukang Hu, Fangzhou Hong, Tao Hu, Liang Pan, Haiyi
Mei, Weiye Xiao, Lei Yang, and Ziwei Liu.
Humanliff:
Layer-wise 3d human generation with diffusion model. arXiv
preprint, 2023. 2, 3, 6, 7
[25] Shoukang Hu, Tao Hu, and Ziwei Liu. Gauhuman: Articu-
lated gaussian splatting from monocular human videos. In
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vi-
sion and Pattern Recognition, pages 20418–20431, 2024. 4


[26] Tao Hu, Fangzhou Hong, and Ziwei Liu. Structldm: Struc-
tured latent diffusion for 3d human generation, 2024. 2, 6,
7
[27] Peter J Huber. Robust estimation of a location parameter. In
Breakthroughs in statistics: Methodology and distribution,
pages 492–518. Springer, 1992. 5
[28] Zeren Jiang, Chen Guo, Manuel Kaufmann, Tianjian Jiang,
Julien Valentin, Otmar Hilliges, and Jie Song. Multiply: Re-
construction of multiple people from monocular video in the
wild. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Com-
puter Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2024. 2
[29] Justin Johnson, Alexandre Alahi, and Li Fei-Fei. Perceptual
losses for real-time style transfer and super-resolution. In
European conference on computer vision, pages 694–711.
Springer, 2016. 5
[30] Bernhard Kerbl, Georgios Kopanas, Thomas Leimk¨uhler,
and George Drettakis.
3d gaussian splatting for real-time
radiance field rendering. ACM Transactions on Graphics, 42
(4), 2023. 2, 4, 1
[31] Rawal Khirodkar, Timur Bagautdinov, Julieta Martinez, Su
Zhaoen, Austin James, Peter Selednik, Stuart Anderson, and
Shunsuke Saito. Sapiens: Foundation for human vision mod-
els. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.12569, 2024. 5, 6, 2
[32] Byungjun Kim, Patrick Kwon, Kwangho Lee, Myunggi Lee,
Sookwan Han, Daesik Kim, and Hanbyul Joo.
Chupa:
Carving 3d clothed humans from skinned shape priors us-
ing 2d diffusion probabilistic models.
In Proceedings of
the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision
(ICCV), pages 15965–15976, 2023. 3
[33] Diederik P Kingma. Adam: A method for stochastic opti-
mization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6980, 2014. 1
[34] Nikos Kolotouros, Thiemo Alldieck, Enric Corona, Ed-
uard Gabriel Bazavan, and Cristian Sminchisescu. Instant
3d human avatar generation using image diffusion models.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.07516, 2024. 3
[35] Maria Korosteleva and Sung-Hee Lee. Neuraltailor: Recon-
structing sewing pattern structures from 3d point clouds of
garments. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG), 41(4):1–
16, 2022. 2
[36] Siran Li, Chen Liu, Ruiyang Liu, Zhendong Wang, Gaofeng
He, Yong-Lu Li, Xiaogang Jin, and Huamin Wang. Garma-
genet: A multimodal generative framework for sewing pat-
tern design and generic garment modeling. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2504.01483, 2025. 2
[37] Yixun Liang, Xin Yang, Jiantao Lin, Haodong Li, Xiao-
gang Xu, and Yingcong Chen. Luciddreamer: Towards high-
fidelity text-to-3d generation via interval score matching. In
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vi-
sion and Pattern Recognition, pages 6517–6526, 2024. 2
[38] Chen-Hsuan Lin, Jun Gao, Luming Tang, Towaki Takikawa,
Xiaohui Zeng, Xun Huang, Karsten Kreis, Sanja Fidler,
Ming-Yu Liu, and Tsung-Yi Lin. Magic3d: High-resolution
text-to-3d content creation. In IEEE Conference on Com-
puter Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2023. 2
[39] Siyou Lin, Zhe Li, Zhaoqi Su, Zerong Zheng, Hongwen
Zhang, and Yebin Liu. Layga: Layered gaussian avatars for
animatable clothing transfer. In ACM SIGGRAPH 2024 Con-
ference Papers, pages 1–11, 2024. 3
[40] Ruoshi Liu, Rundi Wu, Basile Van Hoorick, Pavel Tok-
makov, Sergey Zakharov, and Carl Vondrick.
Zero-1-to-
3: Zero-shot one image to 3d object.
In Proceedings of
the IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision,
pages 9298–9309, 2023. 2
[41] Yufei Liu, Junshu Tang, Chu Zheng, Shijie Zhang, Jinkun
Hao, Junwei Zhu, and Dongjin Huang. Clothedreamer: Text-
guided garment generation with 3d gaussians. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2406.16815, 2024. 5
[42] Zhen
Liu,
Yao
Feng,
Michael
J.
Black,
Derek
Nowrouzezahrai, Liam Paull, and Weiyang Liu.
Meshd-
iffusion: Score-based generative 3d mesh modeling.
In
International Conference on Learning Representations,
2023. 2
[43] Matthew Loper, Naureen Mahmood, Javier Romero, Gerard
Pons-Moll, and Michael J. Black. SMPL: A skinned multi-
person linear model. ACM Transactions on Graphics, (Proc.
SIGGRAPH Asia), 34(6):248:1–248:16, 2015. 2
[44] Marko Mihajlovic, Shunsuke Saito, Aayush Bansal, Michael
Zollhoefer, and Siyu Tang. Coap: Compositional articulated
occupancy of people. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Con-
ference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages
13201–13210, 2022. 3
[45] Ben Mildenhall, Pratul P Srinivasan, Matthew Tancik,
Jonathan T Barron, Ravi Ramamoorthi, and Ren Ng. Nerf:
Representing scenes as neural radiance fields for view syn-
thesis. Communications of the ACM, 65(1):99–106, 2021.
2
[46] Gyeongsik Moon, Takaaki Shiratori, and Shunsuke Saito.
Expressive whole-body 3d gaussian avatar. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2407.21686, 2024. 3
[47] Norman
M¨uller,
Yawar
Siddiqui,
Lorenzo
Porzi,
Samuel Rota Bulo,
Peter Kontschieder,
and Matthias
Nießner.
Diffrf:
Rendering-guided 3d radiance field
diffusion.
In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
pages
4328–4338, 2023. 2
[48] Alex Nichol, Heewoo Jun, Prafulla Dhariwal, Pamela
Mishkin, and Mark Chen. Point-e: A system for generat-
ing 3d point clouds from complex prompts. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2212.08751, 2022. 2
[49] Michael Niemeyer and Andreas Geiger. Giraffe: Represent-
ing scenes as compositional generative neural feature fields.
In Proc. IEEE Conf. on Computer Vision and Pattern Recog-
nition (CVPR), 2021. 2
[50] Atsuhiro Noguchi, Xiao Sun, Stephen Lin, and Tatsuya
Harada. Unsupervised learning of efficient geometry-aware
neural articulated representations. In European Conference
on Computer Vision, 2022. 2, 3
[51] Pablo Palafox, Nikolaos Sarafianos, Tony Tung, and Angela
Dai. Spams: Structured implicit parametric models. In Pro-
ceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition, pages 12851–12860, 2022. 3
[52] Georgios Pavlakos, Vasileios Choutas, Nima Ghorbani,
Timo Bolkart, Ahmed A. A. Osman, Dimitrios Tzionas, and
Michael J. Black. Expressive body capture: 3d hands, face,
and body from a single image. In Proceedings IEEE Conf.
