Title: Pointavatar: Deformable point-based head avatars from videos

PointAvatar: Deformable Point-based Head Avatars from Videos
Yufeng Zheng1,2
Wang Yifan3
Gordon Wetzstein3
Michael J. Black2
Otmar Hilliges1
1ETH Zurich, 2Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, 3Stanford University
Figure 1. PointAvatar learns lighting-disentangled point-based head avatars from a monocular RGB video captured by a smartphone.
Abstract
The ability to create realistic animatable and relightable
head avatars from casual video sequences would open up
wide ranging applications in communication and entertain-
ment. Current methods either build on explicit 3D mor-
phable meshes (3DMM) or exploit neural implicit repre-
sentations. The former are limited by ﬁxed topology, while
the latter are non-trivial to deform and inefﬁcient to ren-
der. Furthermore, existing approaches entangle lighting in
the color estimation, thus they are limited in re-rendering
the avatar in new environments. In contrast, we propose
PointAvatar, a deformable point-based representation that
disentangles the source color into intrinsic albedo and
normal-dependent shading. We demonstrate that PointA-
vatar bridges the gap between existing mesh- and implicit
representations, combining high-quality geometry and ap-
pearance with topological ﬂexibility, ease of deformation
and rendering efﬁciency. We show that our method is able
to generate animatable 3D avatars using monocular videos
from multiple sources including hand-held smartphones,
laptop webcams and internet videos, achieving state-of-the-
art quality in challenging cases where previous methods
fail, e.g., thin hair strands, while being signiﬁcantly more
efﬁcient in training than competing methods.
contact: yufeng.zheng@inf.ethz.ch
project page: https://zhengyuf.github.io/PointAvatar/
1. Introduction
Personalized 3D avatars are crucial building blocks of
the metaverse and beyond. Successful tools for creating
avatars should enable easy data capture, efﬁcient compu-
tation, and create a photo-realistic, animatable, and re-
lightable 3D representation of the user. Unfortunately, ex-
isting approaches fall short of meeting these requirements.
Recent methods that create 3D avatars from videos ei-
ther build on 3D morphable models (3DMMs) [26, 35] or
leverage neural implicit representations [32–34]. The for-
mer [7, 12, 21, 22] allows for efﬁcient rasterization and in-
herently generalizes to unseen deformations, yet they can-
not easily model individuals with eyeglasses or complex
hairstyles, as template meshes suffer from a-priori ﬁxed
topologies and are limited to surface-like geometries. Re-
cently, neural implicit representations have also been used
to model 3D heads [4, 11, 15, 52]. While they outperform
3DMM-based methods in capturing hair strands and eye-
glasses, they are signiﬁcantly less efﬁcient to train and ren-
der, since rendering a single pixel requires querying many
points along the camera ray. Moreover, deforming implicit
representations in a generalizable manner is non-trivial and
existing approaches have to revert to an inefﬁcient root-
ﬁnding loop, which impacts training and testing time nega-
tively [9,17,25,45,52].
To address these issues, we propose PointAvatar, a novel
avatar representation that uses point clouds to represent the
canonical geometry and learns a continuous deformation
1
arXiv:2212.08377v2  [cs.CV]  28 Feb 2023


Efﬁcient
Rendering
Easy
Animation
Flexible
Topology
Thin
Strands
Surface
Geometry
Meshes





Implicit Surfaces





Volumetric NeRF





Points (ours)





Table 1. PointAvatar is efﬁcient to render and deform which en-
ables straightforward rendering of full images during training. It
can also handles ﬂexible topologies and thin structures and can re-
construct good surface normals in surface-like regions, e.g., skin.
ﬁeld for animation. Speciﬁcally, we optimize an oriented
point cloud to represent the geometry of a subject in a
canonical space. For animation, the learned deformation
ﬁeld maps the canonical points to the deformed space with
learned blendshapes and skinning weights, given expression
and pose parameters of a pretrained 3DMM. Compared to
implicit representations, our point-based representation can
be rendered efﬁciently with a standard differentiable raster-
izer. Moreover, they can be deformed effectively using es-
tablished techniques, e.g., skinning. Compared to meshes,
points are considerably more ﬂexible and versatile.
Be-
sides the ability to conform the topology to model acces-
sories such as eyeglasses, they can also represent complex
volume-like structures such as ﬂuffy hair. We summarize
the advantanges of our point-based representation in Tab. 1.
One strength of our method is the disentanglement of
lighting effects. Given a monocular video captured in un-
constrained lighting, we disentangle the apparent color into
the intrinsic albedo and the normal-dependent shading; see
Fig. 1. However, due to the discrete nature of points, accu-
rately computing normals from point clouds is a challenging
and costly task [5,16,29,36], where the quality can deteri-
orate rapidly with noise, and insufﬁcient or irregular sam-
pling. Hence we propose two techniques to (a) robustly and
accurately obtain normals from learned canonical points,
and (b) consistently transform the canonical point normals
with the non-rigid deformation. For the former, we exploit
the low-frequency bias of MLPs [37] and estimate the nor-
mals by ﬁtting a smooth signed distance function (SDF)
to the points; for the latter, we leverage the continuity of
the deformation mapping and transform the normals analyt-
ically using the deformation’s Jacobian. The two techniques
lead to high-quality normal estimation, which in turn propa-
gates the rich geometric cues contained in shading to further
improve the point geometry. With disentangled albedo and
detailed normal directions, PointAvatar can be relit and ren-
dered under novel scenes.
As demonstrated using various videos captured with
DSLR, smartphone, laptop cameras, or obtained from the
internet, the proposed representation combines the advan-
tages of popular mesh and implicit representations, and sur-
passes both in many challenging scenarios. In summary, our
contributions include:
1. We propose a novel representation for 3D animatable
avatars based on an explicit canonical point cloud and
continuous deformation, which shows state-of-the-art
photo-realism while being considerably more efﬁcient
than existing implicit 3D avatar methods;
2. We disentangle the RGB color into a pose-agnostic
albedo and a pose-dependent shading component;
3. We demonstrate the advantage of our methods on a
variety of subjects captured through various commod-
ity cameras, showing superior results in challenging
cases, e.g., for voluminous curly hair and novel poses
with large deformation.
Code is available: https://github.com/zhengyuf/pointavatar
2. Related Work
Point clouds for neural rendering.
Point-based neural
rendering is gaining attention thanks to the ﬂexibility and
scalability of point representations [43]. Aliev et al. [1]
introduce one of the ﬁrst approaches to point-based neural
rendering, in which each point is augmented with a neural
feature. These features are projected to a set of multi-scale
2D feature maps using a standard point rasterizer, then con-
verted to an RGB image. Recently, Point-NeRF [47] com-
bines points with volumetric rendering, achieving perceptu-
ally high-quality results while being efﬁcient to train. Both
of the above methods obtain point geometry through off-
the-shelf multi-view stereo methods and keep them ﬁxed
during optimization, other approaches [39, 50] propose to
jointly optimize the point geometry using differentiable
point rasterization [24,46,49]. Our method not only jointly
optimizes both the point geometry and colors, but also the
deformation of the point cloud through a forward deforma-
tion ﬁeld proposed in [9,52].
Head avatars from 2D. Learning photo-realistic head
avatars from 2D observations is an emerging research topic
in the computer vision community. Based on 3DMMs [26,
35], recent works [12,22] leverage differentiable neural ren-
dering to learn the detailed facial appearance and complete
head geometry for a single subject. The idea is extended
in [7,21] to enable generative or one-shot head avatars. An-
other line of work leverages neural implicit representations.
NerFace [11] extends photo-realistic and ﬂexible neural ra-
diance ﬁelds (NeRF) [33] to model the dynamic head ge-
ometry and view-dependent appearance. IMavatar [52] em-
ploys neural implicit surfaces [20, 32, 34, 48] and learns an
implicit deformation ﬁeld for generalizable animation. Im-
plicit head avatars have been extended to a multi-subject
scenario by [4,15]. To the best of our knowledge, our work
is the ﬁrst to learn deformable point-based head avatars.
Point-based human avatars.
PoP [31] learns to model
pose-dependent clothing geometry by mapping points from
2


Figure 2. Method pipeline. We model the human head as a learned deformable point cloud consisting of the point locations xc, normals
nc and albedo a, which describe the subject’s geometry and intrinsic appearance in the canonical space. To deform points given a target
expression and pose in a controllable and interpretable way, we warp xc into the FLAME canonical space via a learned offset O, and
then deform further to the target deformed space by applying the blendshape and skinning using learned personalized blendshape bases
(E, P) and skinning weights (W). After obtaining the deformed geometry, a small shading MLP is used to obtain shadings sd from the
deformed normals nd. These are multiplied with the albedo colors a to produce the shaded colors cd, which are rendered to images via
differentiable rasterization. PointAvatar leverages a combination of per-pixel and image-based losses to improve photo-realism, while the
FLAME regularization term encourages controllable and generalizable animations.
the minimally-clothed SMPL [28] surface to the clothing
surface and demonstrates impressive geometric quality on
various clothing types.
Point-based clothing representa-
tion is extended by [27, 30] to mitigate point sparsity is-
sues for long skirts. Our work is principally different in
two ways: 1) We learn the deformation, geometry, and ap-
pearance jointly from scratch, without explicitly relying on
a 3DMM template. 2) We learn from monocular videos,
whereas previous works [27,30,31] require 3D scans.
3. Method
Given a monocular RGB video of a subject performing
various expressions and poses, our model jointly learns (1) a
point cloud representing the pose-agnostic geometry and
appearance of the subject in a canonical space; (2) a de-
formation network that transforms the point cloud into new
poses using FLAME expression and pose parameters ex-
tracted from the RGB frames; (3) a shading network that
outputs a per-point shading vector based on the point nor-
mals in the deformed space. The three components can be
jointly optimized by comparing the rendering of the shaded
points in the deformed space with the input frames. Once
trained, we can synthesize new sequences of the same sub-
ject under novel poses, expressions and lighting conditions.
Fig. 2 represent an overview of our method.
3.1. Point-based Canonical Representation
Our canonical point representation consists of a set of
learnable points Pc = {xci} with i = {1, 2, . . . , N}, where
xc ∈R3 denotes the optimizable point locations. We em-
Figure 3.
The Coarse-to-ﬁne optimization strategy upsamples
points and reduces point radii periodically during training, enable-
ing fast convergence and detailed ﬁnal reconstruction.
pirically choose to learn points in an unconstrained canon-
ical space without enforcing them to correspond to a pre-
deﬁned pose, and found that this leads to better geometry
quality (implementation explained in Sec. 3.2).
For optimization, we initialize with a sparse point cloud
randomly sampled on a sphere and periodically upsam-
ple the point cloud while reducing the rendering radii.
This coarse-to-ﬁne optimization scheme enables fast con-
vergence of training because the initial sparse points are ef-
ﬁcient to deform and render, and can quickly approximate
the coarse shape, whereas denser points in the late training
stage lead to good reproduction of details. A schematic of
this procedure is provided in Fig. 3. Furthermore, at the end
of every epoch, we prune away invisible points that have
3


not been projected onto any pixels with visibility above a
predeﬁned threshold, which further accelerates training.
Our method disentangles the point colors into a pose-
agnostic albedo component and a pose-dependent shading
component (explained later in Sec. 3.3), where the shad-
ing component is inferred from the point normals in the de-
formed space. We ﬁrst discuss how to compute the normals
and the albedo in canonical space, followed by the learned
transformation of point locations and normals into the de-
formed space (see Sec. 3.2).
Canonical normals.
Point normals are local geometric
descriptors that can be estimated from neighboring point
locations. However, estimating normals in this way yields
poor results, especially when the points are sparse, noisy
and irregularly sampled, as is the case during early training.
To alleviate this issue, we propose to estimate the point nor-
mals from an SDF deﬁned by the canonical points. Normals
are then deﬁned as the spatial gradient of the SDF:
nc = ∇xcSDF (xc) .
(1)
Speciﬁcally, we represent the SDF with an MLP and ﬁt
the zero-level set to the canonical point locations using a
data term and an Eikonal regularizer, deﬁned as:
Lsdf = ∥SDF (xc)∥2 and Leik = (∥∇xeSDF (xe)∥−1)2 ,
(2)
where the Eikonal samples xe consist of the original and
perturbed point locations [13]. We update the SDF using
current point locations at each training step.
Canonical albedo.
We use an MLP to map the point loca-
tions xc to the albedo colors a ∈R3, similar to [8]. Com-
pared with directly modeling the albedo of each point as
an individual per-point feature, the inductive bias of MLPs
automatically enforces a local smoothness prior on albedo
colors [2,3,14,42]. For efﬁciency, we use a shared MLP to
compute the canonical normals and albedo in practice, i.e.,
[SDF (xc) ; a] = MLPc (xc) .
(3)
3.2. Point Deformation
In order to achieve controllable animations, PointAvatar
is deformed using the same expression and pose parameters
as FLAME [26], a parametric head model learned from 4D
scans. Our deformation takes a two-step approach shown
in Fig. 2. In the ﬁrst stage, we warp the canonical points
xc to its location in an intermediate pose xo, which cor-
responds to a predeﬁned mouth-opened canonical pose of
the FLAME template. In the second stage, we use the tar-
get FLAME expression and pose parameters to transform
xo to the deformed space based on learned blendshapes and
skinning weights. Our experiments (see Sec. 4.4) empiri-
cally show that the proposed two-staged deformation helps
to avoid bad local minima during optimization and yields
more accurate geometries.
To improve expression ﬁdelity and to account for ac-
cessories such as eyeglasses, we learn personalized defor-
mation blendshapes and skinning weights, similar to IMa-
vatar [52]. Speciﬁcally, a coordinate-based MLP is used
to map each canonical point xc to (1) an offset O ∈R3,
which translates xc to its corresponding location in the
FLAME canonical space xo; (2) ne expression blendshapes
and np pose blendshapes, denoted as E ∈Rne×3 and
P ∈Rnp×9×3; (3) LBS weights W ∈Rnj associated to
the nj bones. The point location in deformed space xd is
then computed as:
xo = xc + O
(4)
xd = LBS (xo + BP (θ; P) + BE (ψ; E) , J (ψ) , θ, W) ,
(5)
where LBS and J deﬁne the standard skinning function and
the joint regressor deﬁned in FLAME, and BP and BE de-
note the linear combination of blendshapes, which outputs
the additive pose and expression offsets from the anima-
tion coefﬁcients θ and ψ and the blendshape bases P and E.
Despite the similarity of this formulation to IMavatar [52],
our forward deformation mapping only needs to be applied
once in order to map canonical point locations xc to the
deformed space, and therefore does not need the computa-
tionally costly correspondence search of IMavatar [52].
Normal deformation.
The deformation mapping deﬁned
in Eq. (5) is differentiable w.r.t. the input point locations.
This allows us to transform canonical normals analytically
with the inverse of the deformation Jacobian
nd = lnc
dxd
dxc
−1
,
(6)
where l is a normalizing scalar to ensure the normals are of
unit length. The formulation can be obtained via Taylor’s
theorem. Please check Supp. Mat. for the detailed proof.
3.3. Point Color
The color of each point in the deformed space cd is ob-
tained by multiplying the intrinsic albedo a ∈R3 with the
pose-dependent lighting effects which we refer to as shad-
ing sd ∈R3:
cd = a ◦sd,
(7)
where ◦denotes the Hadamard product. As we assume our
input video is captured under a ﬁxed lighting condition and
camera position, we model the shading as a function of the
4


deformed point normals nd. In practice, we approximate
their relation using a shallow MLP:
sd = MLPs (nd)
(8)
By conditioning the albedo only on the canonical locations
(see Sec. 3.1) and the shading only on the normal directions,
our formulation achieves unsupervised albedo disentangle-
ment. Despite that our lighting model is simple and mini-
mally constrained, our method can perform rudimentary re-
lighting by changing the shading component (see Sec. 4.2).
3.4. Differentiable Point Rendering
One advantage of our point-based representation is that
it can be rendered efﬁciently using rasterization. We adopt
PyTorch3D’s [38] differentiable point renderer.
It splats
each point as a 2D circle with a uniform radius, arranges
them in z-buffers, and ﬁnally composites the splats us-
ing alpha compositing. The alpha values are calculated as
α = 1 −d2/r2, where d is the distance from the point
center to the pixel center and r represents the splatting
radius.
Then, the transmittance values are calculated as
Ti = Qi−1
k=1(1−αk), where i denotes the index of the sorted
points in the z-buffer. The point color values are integrated
to produces the ﬁnal pixel color:
cpix =
X
i
αiTicd,i.
(9)
3.5. Training Objectives
The efﬁciency of point-based rendering allows us to ren-
der the whole image at each training step. This makes it
possible to apply perceptual losses on the whole image,
whereas implicit-based avatar methods are often limited to
per-pixel objectives. Speciﬁcally, we adopt VGG feature
loss [18], deﬁned as
Lvgg (C) =
Fvgg(C) −Fvgg(CGT)
 ,
(10)
where C and CGT denote the predicted and ground truth
image, and Fvgg(·) calculates the features from the ﬁrst four
layers of a pre-trained VGG [41] network.
In addition to Lvgg, we follow prior work and adopt the
losses of IMavatar [52]:
LRGB =
C −CGT ,
Lﬂame = 1
N
N
X
i=1
(λe∥Ei −bEi∥2 + λp∥Pi −bPi∥2 + λw∥Wi −c
Wi∥2),
Lmask =
M −MGT .
Here, M and MGT denote the predicted and ground truth
head mask, bE, bP and c
W are pseudo ground truth deﬁned
by the nearest FLAME vertex.
The mask prediction at
L1 ↓
LPIPS ↓
SSIM ↑
PSNR ↑
IMavatar [52]
0.033; 0.050
0.178; 0.261
0.874; 0.770
22.4; 18.7
NerFace [11]
0.030; 0.045
0.126; 0.187
0.877; 0.782
22.7; 19.6
Ours
0.021; 0.036
0.094; 0.145
0.899; 0.802
26.6; 22.3
NHA [12]
0.022;0.029
0.086; 0.123
0.890; 0.837
25.7; 21.6
Ours (no cloth)
0.017; 0.021
0.077; 0.100
0.912; 0.863
28.6; 25.8
Table 2. Quantitative comparison. The ﬁrst and second num-
ber in each cell represent scores for lab-capture sequences (IMa-
vatar and NerFace datasets) and casual videos (smartphone, we-
bcam and internet videos), respectively. PointAvatar outperforms
implicit-based IMavatar and NerFace by a large margin in percep-
tual quality reﬂected by LPIPS [51]. Compared to 3DMM-based
NHA, our method not only generates complete avatars with shoul-
ders and clothing, but also performs better for the head region.
each pixel is obtained by mpix = P
i αiTi, and the ground
truth mask obtained using an off-the-shelf foreground
estimator [19],
Our total loss is
L = λrgbLRGB+λmaskLmask+λﬂameLﬂame+λvggLvgg. (11)
The loss weights can be found in Supp. Mat. together with
other implementation details.
4. Experiments
Datasets.
We compare our approach with state-of-the-art
(SOTA) methods on 2 subjects from IMavatar [52] and 2
subjects from NerFace [11]. Additionally, we evaluate dif-
ferent methods on 1 subject collected from the internet, 4
subjects captured with hand-held smartphones, and 1 sub-
ject from a laptop webcam. These settings pose new chal-
lenges to avatar methods due to limited head pose varia-
tion, automatic exposure adjustment or low image resolu-
tion. In Supp. Mat., we evaluate reconstructed point geom-
etry on a synthetic dataset rendered from the MakeHuman
project [6]. For all subjects, we use the same face-tracking
results for all comparing methods.
Baselines.
We compare our method with three SOTA
baselines, including (1) NerFace [11], which leverages dy-
namic neural radiance ﬁelds [33], (2) neural head avatar
(NHA) [12] based on 3D morphable mesh models [26]
(3) and IMavatar [52], which builds on neural implicit
surfaces [48] and learnable blendshapes.
Together with
our method, which represents the head geometry with de-
formable point clouds, our experiments reveal the strength
and weaknesses of each geometry representation in the sce-
nario of head avatar reconstruction. Through our experi-
ments, we demonstrate the efﬁciency, ﬂexibility and photo-
realism achieved by point-based avatars.
4.1. Comparison with SOTA Methods
In Tab. 2, we quantitatively compare our point-based
avatar method with SOTA baselines using conventional
5


DSLR (NerFace)
DSLR (IMavatar)
Internet video
smartphone video
webcam video
NHA [12]
IMavatar [52]
NerFace [11]
Ours
GT
Figure 4. Qualitative comparison. PointAvatar produces photo-realistic and detailed appearance compared to SOTA methods, especially
apparent in skin details and hair textures. Our point-based method is also ﬂexible enough to capture challenging geometries such as
eyeglasses and thin hair strands, which cannot be handled by mesh-based methods.
6


metrics including L1, LPIPS [51], SSIM and PSNR. Since
NHA [12] only models the head region, we compare with
NHA without considering the clothing region. PointAvatar
achieves the best metrics among all methods on both lab-
captured DSLR sequences and videos from more casual
capture settings, e.g., with smartphones.
Eyeglasses and detailed structures. In Fig. 4, we show
qualitatively that our method can successfully handle the
non-face topology introduced by eyeglasses, which pose se-
vere challenges for 3DMM-based methods. NHA cannot
model the empty space between the frame of the eyeglasses
because of its ﬁxed topology and, instead, learns a convex
hull painted with dynamic textures. In the second exam-
ple of a man with a hair bun, even though the bun is topo-
logically consistent with the template mesh, NHA still pro-
duces a worse hair silhouette than other methods. IMavatar,
based on implicit surfaces, is theoretically capable of mod-
eling the geometry of eyeglasses, but it also fails to learn
part of the thin frame of glasses. Furthermore, for IMavatar
to learn such thin structures, accurate foreground segmen-
tation masks are required, which are hard to obtain in-the-
wild. In Supp. Mat., we show that our method can be trained
without mask supervision or known background.
Surface-like skin and volumetric hair. Both NHA and
IMavatar enforce a surface constraint by design. While such
constraint helps with surface geometry reconstruction and
multi-view consistency, it also causes problems when mod-
eling volumetric structures such as the curly hair in the third
example. Our point-based method is free to model volumet-
ric structures where needed, but also encourages surface-
like point geometry in the skin and clothing regions via
point pruning, which removes unseen inside points.
We
show that our method renders sharp and realistic images
even for extreme head poses. In contrast, NerFace is a ﬂex-
ible volumetric NeRF [33]-based avatar method. While it
is capable of modeling thin structures of any topology, its
under-constrained nature leads to poor geometry and com-
promises rendering quality in uncommon poses. Even for
near frontal poses shown in the ﬁrst and third examples, our
method still produces sharper skin details than NerFace.
4.2. Lighting Disentanglement
Our method disentangles rendered colors into intrinsic
albedo colors and normal-dependent shading values. By
changing the shading component, we can alter the light-
ing directions as shown in Fig. 5 (see Supp. Mat. for de-
tails of relighting). In the following, we demonstrate that
lighting disentanglement, along with the proposed normal
estimation techniques, improves the geometry details of the
reconstruction. In column 2 of Fig. 6, we show that, disen-
tangling shading and albedo itself improves facial geome-
try (see the cheek area). We further ablate two of our de-
albedo
normal
shading
rendering
relit
Figure 5. Self-supervised lighting disentanglement. PointAvatar
disentangles albedo and normal-depedent shading from a single
video captured with a ﬁxed lighting condition.
After training,
PointAvatar can be faithfully relit.
(1) entangled (2) 1+disentangle (3) 2+SDF (4) 3+Jacobian
Figure 6.
Geometry ablation.
Disentangling shading and
albedo improves facial normals compared to an entangled ren-
dering model. Moreover, obtaining canonical point normals from
SDF further improved smoothness. Transforming normals with
the spatial Jacobian of the deformation ﬁeld enables the capture of
blendshape-related normal changes, e.g., around the nasal line.
sign choices for obtaining better point normals. First, we
compare our SDF-based normal estimation with direct nor-
mal estimation, which calculates normals by approximating
the local plane of neighboring points. Normals obtained
through SDF are less noisy, especially in highly detailed re-
gions such as the hair, eyes and mouth, where direct normal
estimation often fails. Second, we compare our proposed
normal transformation using the deformation Jacobian vs.
transforming the normals simply with the rotation matrix of
the point deformation. The latter ignores the spatial changes
of blendshapes and LBS weights. As column 4 shows, our
normal transformation method takes into account the effects
of additive blendshapes, and is able to produce correct nor-
mals around the nasal line when smiling.
4.3. Training Efﬁciency
In Tab. 3 and Fig. 7, we show that PointAvatar is con-
siderably faster to train and render than implicit head avatar
methods. Thanks to the coarse-to-ﬁne learning strategy and
7


Method
Training time (hour)
Rendering time per image (train)
IMavatar
48h
100s
NerFace
54h
4s
Ours
6h
0.1s - 1.5s (varies with point numbers)
Table 3. Training and rendering time. Compared to implicit-
based methods, our method is signiﬁcantly faster in training and is
able to render full-images much more efﬁciently.
20.82
20.78
21.11
23.48
24.52
24.30
40m
1h30m
3h
Figure 7. Training efﬁciency. PointAvatar converges much faster
than implicit-based methods. Here we show NerFace [11] as an
example, and indicate the average PSNR of the test set.
wo/ VGG
with VGG
Figure 8. Ablation: VGG loss improves photo-realism compared
to only using a per-pixel L1 loss. PointAvatar is able to render full
images efﬁciently during training, enabling the usage of various
image- and patch-based losses.
point pruning, our method only needs to render a small
number of points with large radii in early training stages,
which signiﬁcantly speeds up training. With the ability to
render full images efﬁciently during training, PointAvatar
can be trivially combined with various image- and patch-
based training objectives, which target certain properties,
e.g., photo-realism, much more effectively than pixel-based
losses. In Fig. 8, we ablate our VGG feature loss, revealing
its signiﬁcant effect in boosting photo-realism.
4.4. Ablation: Free Model Canonical Space
As depicted in Fig. 9, having an additional freely-learned
canonical space, compared to forcing the model to directly
learn in a predeﬁned FLAME space, improves the canoni-
cal point geometry and generalization to novel poses signif-
icantly. A possible reason is that the deformations, modeled
without canonical offset
with canonical offset
Figure 9. Ablation: canonical offset improves the canonical 3D
geometry and therefore boosts generalization to novel head poses.
For both cases, we show the canonical point representation (trans-
formed to the FLAME canonical space if using canonical offset)
and a deformed representation in a novel pose.
by an MLP, are easier to optimize compared to point loca-
tions. Without the canonical offset O, the model overﬁts
and learns wrong canonical geometries.
5. Discussion
We propose PointAvatar, a deformable point-based
avatar representation that features high ﬂexibility, efﬁcient
rendering and straightforward deformation. We show that
our method is able to handle various challenging cases in
the task of head avatar modeling, including eyeglasses, vo-
luminous hair, skin details and extreme head poses. Despite
being trained only on a monocular video with ﬁxed lighting
conditions, PointAvatar achieves detailed facial and hair ge-
ometry and faithfully disentangles lighting effects from the
intrinsic albedo.
There are several exciting future directions.
(1) Our
shading MLP maps normal directions to pose-dependent
lighting effects, without further disentangling them into en-
vironment maps and surface reﬂectance properties, limiting
relighting capability. Future works could leverage a more
constrained physically-based rendering model. (2) We ren-
der points with uniform radius but some regions require
denser and ﬁner points to be modeled accurately, e.g., eyes
and hair strands. Rendering with different point sizes could
potentially achieve detailed reconstructions with less points,
and speed up training and rendering further. (3) We focus
on the explainability of our method, but future works could
combine PointAvatar with 2D neural rendering to boost
photo-realism. (4) Our method cannot faithfully model the
reﬂection of eyeglass lenses, which can be improved by
modeling transparencies and reﬂections [44].
Acknowledgements Yufeng Zheng is supported by the Max
Planck ETH Center for Learning Systems. Wang Yifan is
partially funded by the SNF postdoc mobility fellowship.
MJB has received research gift funds from Adobe, Intel,
Nvidia, Meta/Facebook, and Amazon. MJB has ﬁnancial
interests in Amazon, Datagen Technologies, and Meshca-
pade GmbH. While MJB is a part-time employee of Mesh-
capade, his research was performed solely at, and funded
solely by, the Max Planck Society.
8


Supplemental Materials
In this supplemental document, we provide the addi-
tional experiments mentioned in the main paper in Sec. 1,
implementation details for our method in Sec. 2, the proof
for Jacobian-based normal transformation in Sec. 3, and dis-
cussions about data capture ethics in Sec. 4. Additionally,
we recommend checking out our supplemental video.
1. Additional Results
1.1. Results on the MakeHuman Dataset
We evaluate the reconstructed surface geometry on the
MakeHuman synthetic dataset rendered from [6]. We show
that PointAvatar is not only capable of capturing volumetric
structures as shown in the main paper, but also performs
on par with state-of-the-art methods on surface geometry
reconstruction, as shown in Fig. 1 and Tab. 1.
NHA [12]
IMavatar [52]
Ours
Ground-Truth
Figure 1. Qualitative comparison of surface geometry. Our
point-based avatar representation reconstructs comparable head
geometry to surface-only representations such as meshes (NHA)
and implicit surfaces (IMavatar).
Method
female 1
female 2
male 1
male 2
NHA [12]
0.94
0.95
0.94
0.94
IMavatar [52]
0.961
0.966
0.954
0.955
Ours
0.954
0.954
0.944
0.958
Table 1.
Quantitative comparison on the MakeHuman
dataset [6]. We report the normal consistency metric for evalu-
ating reconstructed surface geometry. The scores for NHA [12]
and IMavatar [52] are obtained from their papers.
We thank the authors of NHA [12] for kindly sharing this
evaluation dataset with us.
256
256
256
256
256
256
256
256
128
128
128
128
Deformation MLP
Softmax
Canonical MLP
64
64
Shading MLP
5
150
108
Sigmoid
256
SDF
Sigmoid
3
3
1
3
Figure 3. Network architecture. We show the network archi-
tectures of the canonical, deformation and shading MLPs. Except
from the last layer, each linear layer is followed by weight normal-
ization [40] and non-linear activation. We use the Softplus [10]
function for the canonical and deformation MLP, and the ReLU
activation for the shading MLP.
1.2. Learning without Foreground Masks
learned mask
foreground
background
full
Figure 2. Self-supervised foreground-background disentangle-
ment. PointAvatar can be learned without mask supervision or
known background.
It is beneﬁcial to learn avatars without relying on fore-
ground segmentation masks, because off-the-shelf segmen-
tation networks often fail in in-the-wild scenarios. In Fig. 2,
we show that PointAvatar is able to roughly disentangle
foreground and background contents in a self-supervised
manner. Note that NerFace [11] cannot be learned without
known backgrounds.
2. Implementation Details
In this section, we provide implementation details re-
garding network architectures, training and evaluation pro-
cedures, and the preprocessing of videos.
2.1. Network Architecture
We show the architecture of the canonical, deformation
and shading MLPs in Fig. 3.
1


2.2. Training Details
Loss weights and optimization.
We choose λrgb
=
1, λmask = 1, λﬂame = 1, and λvgg = 0.1 for most of our ex-
periments, except for the experiment shown in Fig. 6 (main
paper), where we used λrgb = 5, and λvgg = 0.05, and
the experiment on synthetic data (Sec. 1.1 in Supp. Mat.),
where we used λrgb = 10, and λvgg = 0. For the ﬂame loss,
we choose λe = 1000, λp = 1000, and λw = 1. For op-
timizing the canonical SDF, we use λSDF = 1, and λeik =
0.1. We train our models using an Adam optimizer [23]
for 63 epochs, with a learning rate of η = 1e−4, and
β = (0.9, 0.999).
Static bone transformation.
In the pre-processing step,
the FLAME tracking of the upper body is often unstable.
We handle this problem via the introduction of an additional
static bone, similar to IMavatar [52]. Since the upper body
remains mostly static in the training video, the deformation
MLP assigns large LBS weights to the static bone to re-
duce shoulder motion under different FLAME pose conﬁg-
urations. This trick effectively reduces shoulder jittering.
Point upsampling and pruning.
Every 5 epochs, we
double the number of points and reduce the point rasteri-
zation radii, which allows our method to capture ﬁner de-
tails. The new point locations are obtained by perturbating
the current points with random noises. The factor for radius
reduction is carefully chosen: Assuming that points roughly
form a surface, the radius should be decreased by a factor
of 1/
√
2. We choose to reduce the point radii by a factor of
0.75 in practice. Additionally, after each epoch, we prune
away points that are invisible, i.e., not projected onto any
pixels with compositing weights larger than a threshold. We
choose 0.5 as the pruning threshold.
2.3. Evaluation Details
FLAME
[26]
parameter
optimization.
Similar
to
NHA [12], our method also ﬁne-tunes pre-tracked FLAME
expression and pose parameters during training and evalu-
ation. For training, the loss weights are elaborated in the
main paper and in Sec. 2.2 of Supp. Mat. For test-time
tracking optimization, we only use the RGB loss.
Hole ﬁlling.
Rendered images from PointAvatar may con-
tain “white dot” artifacts. This happens due to the spar-
sity of deformed point clouds which reveals the white back-
ground. The issue mainly occurs around (1) stretched re-
gions (e.g. neck), in this case, the deformation causes spar-
sity; (2) regions that are infrequently observed during train-
ing (e.g. proﬁle views), because unseen points are pruned
during training (see Sec. 2.2 of Supp. Mat. for pruning strat-
egy). In Fig. 4, we compare several post-processing meth-
ods to address this artifact. (1) We apply erosion and dila-
tion consecutively to the rendered images. This method ﬁlls
most white dots but slightly blurs images. (2) We train a per-
subject 2D neural network (NN) to remove white dots from
the rendered images. This method robustly removes arti-
facts and does not blur images, but it requires cumbersome
per-subject NN training. More speciﬁcally, we augment GT
images with white dots using the rendered mask, and train a
2D NN to remove the added artifacts. We found the trained
NN can remove artifacts from rendered images despite the
domain gap, and also generalizes to unseen poses. (3) We
increase point radii based on distances to neighbors before
rasterization. This method principally tackles the sparsity
problem in 3D space, but often falsely thickens thin struc-
tures such as hair strands. We use the ﬁrst method in the
paper due to its simplicity and effectiveness, but adaptive
radii and neural networks could also be leveraged for better
performance in some cases.
orig. RGB
(1) erode-dilate
(2) 2D NN
(3) adapt radii
Figure 4. Point sparsity and white dot artifacts. We show the
rendered image which contains white dot artifacts (orig. RGB),
and reﬁned results from different post-processing methods.
Relighting.
Our method learns to disentangle albedo
from pose-dependent lighting effects which we refer to as
shading. Previous works that use MLP-based texture net-
works transform 3D locations and normal directions into
shaded colors. In contrast, we perform disentanglement by
conditioning the albedo only on the canonical locations and
the shading only on the normal directions. This is how we
achieve unsupervised albedo disentanglement.
We found our method allows for rudimentary relighting
(1) by manipulating the normal directions of the shading
component, which changes the light direction (please check
the teaser and Fig. 5 in the main paper for horizontally-
ﬂipped and rotated light directions), or (2) by discarding the
learned shading and instead rendering with a default shad-
ing model using the learned albedo and normals. The latter
option allows for relighting in novel scenes. In the supple-
mentary video (03:39), we use a diffused shading model to
relight avatars, but it leads to less faithful appearances com-
pared to the learned shading.
2
