Title: Avatarrex: Real-time expressive full-body avatars

AvatarReX: Real-time Expressive Full-body Avatars
ZERONG ZHENG, Department of Automation, Tsinghua University, China
XIAOCHEN ZHAO, Department of Automation, Tsinghua University and NNKosmos Technology, China
HONGWEN ZHANG, Department of Automation, Tsinghua University, China
BONING LIU, Department of Automation, Tsinghua University, China
YEBIN LIU, Department of Automation, Tsinghua University, China
Fig. 1. Example animation results produced by our method. Our method can learn photorealistic full-body avatars that provides full controllability over
the body pose, hand genstrue and the face expression all together. Moreover, it can be rendered in real time without compromising image quality.
We present AvatarReX, a new method for learning NeRF-based full-body
avatars from video data. The learnt avatar not only provides expressive
control of the body, hands and the face together, but also supports real-time
animation and rendering. To this end, we propose a compositional avatar
representation, where the body, hands and the face are separately modeled
in a way that the structural prior from parametric mesh templates is properly
utilized without compromising representation flexibility. Furthermore, we
disentangle the geometry and appearance for each part. With these technical
designs, we propose a dedicated deferred rendering pipeline, which can be
executed at a real-time framerate to synthesize high-quality free-view images.
The disentanglement of geometry and appearance also allows us to design
a two-pass training strategy that combines volume rendering and surface
rendering for network training. In this way, patch-level supervision can be
applied to force the network to learn sharp appearance details on the basis
Authors’ addresses: Zerong Zheng, Department of Automation, Tsinghua University,
Beijing, China, zrzheng1995@foxmail.com; Xiaochen Zhao, Department of Automation,
Tsinghua University and NNKosmos Technology, Beijing, China, zhaoxc19@mails.
tsinghua.edu.cn; Hongwen Zhang, Department of Automation, Tsinghua University,
Beijing, China, zhanghongwen@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn; Boning Liu, Department of
Automation, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China, liuboning@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn;
Yebin Liu, Department of Automation, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China, liuyebin@
mail.tsinghua.edu.cn.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the
author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
© 2023 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
0730-0301/2023/8-ART $15.00
https://doi.org/10.1145/3592101
of geometry estimation. Overall, our method enables automatic construction
of expressive full-body avatars with real-time rendering capability, and can
generate photo-realistic images with dynamic details for novel body motions
and facial expressions.
CCS Concepts: • Computing methodologies →Computer vision; Ren-
dering.
Additional Key Words and Phrases: full-body avatars, real-time rendering,
neural radiance fields
ACM Reference Format:
Zerong Zheng, Xiaochen Zhao, Hongwen Zhang, Boning Liu, and Yebin
Liu. 2023. AvatarReX: Real-time Expressive Full-body Avatars. ACM Trans.
Graph. 42, 4 (August 2023), 19 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3592101
1
INTRODUCTION
Animatable human avatar modeling, as an important topic in special
effects industry, can be applied in many applications such as con-
tent creation and immersive entertainment. Virtual characters are
believed to have the potential to open up a new way for people to
interact with others or intelligent machines in AR/VR settings [Chu
et al. 2020]. Unfortunately, the traditional pipeline for creating 3D
human avatars involves tedious procedures, including scanning,
meshing, rigging and many more. Furthermore, such a pipeline re-
quires expert knowledge and sophisticated capture systems, limiting
its access and increasing its cost [Alexander et al. 2010].
In order to lower the entry barrier for novices and automate the
workflow of experienced artists, researchers have devoted great
efforts in learning 3D human body avatars from images or videos
ACM Trans. Graph., Vol. 42, No. 4, Article . Publication date: August 2023.
arXiv:2305.04789v1  [cs.CV]  8 May 2023


2
•
Zerong Zheng, Xiaochen Zhao, Hongwen Zhang, Boning Liu, and Yebin Liu
of real humans. Building upon explicit meshes [Bagautdinov et al.
2021; Habermann et al. 2021; Xiang et al. 2021], implicit radiance
fields [Peng et al. 2021a; Su et al. 2021; Wang et al. 2022b; Weng
et al. 2022; Zheng et al. 2022b] or both [Liu et al. 2021a; Lombardi
et al. 2021; Remelli et al. 2022], current approaches are able to syn-
thesize realistic human motions under free-view points. Despite the
plethora of these systems, most of them only model the torsos and
the limbs, without combining other fine-grained body parts like
faces and hands. However, an expressive human avatar demands
for full controllability of the body, hands and the face together, as
the essential nuance of human behaviors is conveyed through a
concert of body movements, hand gestures and facial expressions.
Up to now, only research works from industrial labs are able to
achieve this goal [Bagautdinov et al. 2021; Remelli et al. 2022; Xiang
et al. 2022, 2021]. Unfortunately, their methods rely on video data
captured from dense-view camera rigs, which are not accessible for
most individuals and academic organizations.
Apart from expressiveness, another unsolved challenge lies in
the rendering speed. In many applications, the avatars are expected
to interact with users as real human-beings, which emphasizes the
need for real-time animation and rendering. However, the most
recent approaches [Liu et al. 2021a; Peng et al. 2021a; Su et al. 2021;
Wang et al. 2022b; Zheng et al. 2022b] in this field are typically built
upon neural radiance fields (NeRF) [Mildenhall et al. 2020], which
densely samples the 3D space and queries the network millions
of times for volume rendering. Consequently, they are difficult to
render a dynamic avatar at a real-time framerate, preventing them
from being adopted in interactive scenarios.
In this work, we present Real-time eXpressive Avatar (Avatar-
ReX), a novel system that simultaneously achieves expressive con-
trol and real-time animation of full-body human avatars. To this
end, we propose a compositional representation that models the
face, hands and the body with independent implicit fields (Section 3).
Such a compositional design allows us to adopt the most suitable
technique for each part according to its characteristics in shape
and texture variations. In our method, all part representations rely
on the corresponding parametric templates, i.e., SMPL-X [Pavlakos
et al. 2019] for the body, MANO [Romero et al. 2022] for the hands
and Faceverse [Wang et al. 2022a] for the face, but the prior in these
templates is leveraged in totally different manners. For example,
we employ structured local radiance fields [Zheng et al. 2022b] for
clothed body representation in order to eliminate the reliance on
the SMPL-X topology, and, in contrast, directly build the the radi-
ance fields of hands on top of the MANO geometry model. This
is because clothes vary in topology, while the shape variation of
hands is rather limited. To enhance the expressiveness of our avatar,
we introduce several novel techniques for the body and face parts.
Specifically, to capture the rich dynamic details like cloth wrinkles
exhibited in the body part, we propose explicit feature patches to
facilitate the learning of these appearance details. Meanwhile, as
the face part contains many subtle yet important details relating
to different expressions, we utilize convolution networks to extract
distinctive features from the expression space of Faceverse, which
is a better condition for high-fidelity facial rendering. Overall, each
part representation in our avatar is carefully designed, ensuring
that the 3D prior of the parametric templates is properly utilized
without sacrificing representation power and model flexibility.
With these building blocks at hand, we can now derive the fi-
nal expressive avatar by assembling the face, hands and the body
into one holistic model. However, it remains a challenge to train
an avatar with sharp appearance details and render it efficiently at
test time. To resolve these problems, we further improve our avatar
representation by disentangling the geometry and appearance for
each part and using the signed distance function (SDF) as the com-
mon geometric representation. These technical designs enable us to
develop a real-time rendering pipeline based on deferred rendering
(Section 4). The core of our pipeline is to take advantage of the
implicit surface definition in SDF for surface rendering. Compared
to volume rendering in most NeRF-based methods [Mildenhall et al.
2020], surface rendering avoids the need for expensive sampling
along camera rays, leading to a significant speedup. We further
accelerate this process with a dedicated deferred shading scheme,
where the geometry model is firstly reconstructed in the form of an
explicit SDF volume, enabling fast surface location for the later color
evaluation step. As a result, our method successfully accelerates
the avatar rendering process by two orders of magnitude without
compromising the quality.
In addition to testing acceleration, the disentanglement of geom-
etry and appearance can also benefit network training. To this end,
we combine deferred surface rendering with volume rendering to
form a two-pass training strategy (Section 5). On one hand, volume
rendering allows the geometry networks to learn various cloth shape
from scratch with sparse pixel supervision. On the other, when the
surface reconstruction is available, surface rendering minimizes
network queries, making it possible to apply perceptual supervision
on image patches, which is essential to force the color network to
learn high-quality appearance. With our disentangled design, we
can combine the merits from both worlds into two training passes,
and consequently obtain an avatar with sharp appearance details.
In summary, our system is able to create expressive full-body
avatars with high-quality appearance details, and the avatars can
be animated and rendered in real time. The training data for our
avatar is multi-view videos of approximately 2000 frames in length,
captured from 22 cameras (16 for the body and hands and 6 for
the face). After data collection, our method can automatically learn
the avatar representation without the need for pre-scanning efforts
or other manual intervention. Moreover, the learned avatar can be
driven in real-time given new body poses, hand gestures and facial
expressions. Experimental results clearly demonstrate the potential
of applying our method in interactive applications.
2
RELATED WORK
Body Avatars. In the last decade, many efforts have been made
to achieve animatable human avatars. Pioneer works in this field
resort to statistical mesh templates [Joo et al. 2018; Loper et al.
2015; Osman et al. 2020; Pavlakos et al. 2019] to model minimally
clothed bodies. To handle the varying shape of clothing, recent
methods explore more flexible representations such as implicit fields
to model the shapes of clothed humans [Chen et al. 2021; Li et al.
2022b; Lin et al. 2022; Mihajlovic et al. 2021; Saito et al. 2021; Tiwari
ACM Trans. Graph., Vol. 42, No. 4, Article . Publication date: August 2023.


AvatarReX: Real-time Expressive Full-body Avatars
•
3
et al. 2021; Zhang et al. 2023a]. For instance, Neural-GIF [Tiwari
et al. 2021] factorizes human motion into articulation and non-
rigid deformation, and learns to map every point in the space to a
canonical pose using backward skinning. LEAP [Mihajlovic et al.
2021] and SCANimate [Saito et al. 2021] learn the forward and
backward skinning fields with neural networks and regularize the
cycle consistency between them. For better generalization to unseen
poses, SNARF [Chen et al. 2021] proposes a differentiable forward
skinning model based on iterative root finding, which finds the
canonical correspondences of any query point in the posed space.
To acquire animatable characters with color, traditional pipelines
typically reconstruct a subject-specific textured mesh in advance,
and then generate its motions using physics simulation [Guan et al.
2012; Stoll et al. 2010], database retrieval and blending [Xu et al.
2011], or deformation space modeling [Habermann et al. 2021; Joo
et al. 2018]. With accurate tracking of the underlying geometry,
Bagautdinov et al. [2021] model high-fidelity avatars by decoding
dynamic geometry and appearance from disentangled driving sig-
nals. This approach is further extended in [Xiang et al. 2022, 2021]
by representing the clothing as a separate layer in order to recover
sharper garment boundaries. Their reliance on pre-scanning subject-
specific templates can be eliminated via deforming a general body
template. For instance, several works proposed to directly learn this
deformation from geometric data [Ma et al. 2020, 2021b; Pons-Moll
et al. 2017] or RGB videos [Alldieck et al. 2018a,b; Burov et al. 2021].
The texture map and the rasterization step in these methods are later
replaced with neural texture maps and image decoders [Hu et al.
2022; Liu et al. 2021b, 2019b; Prokudin et al. 2021; Raj et al. 2021;
Shysheya et al. 2019] to achieve more photo-realistic rendering.
In the past three years, neural volumetric representations have
demonstrated impressive results on novel view synthesis of static
scenes [Mildenhall et al. 2020] or dynamic scenes [Lombardi et al.
2019]. Since then, great efforts have been made to extend these neu-
ral representations to human avatars. For example, Neural Body [Peng
et al. 2021b] uses SMPL [Loper et al. 2015] to establish correspon-
dences across different frames and trains a sparse convolution net-
work to convert the SMPL vertices into a radiance volume. It sup-
ports high-quality view synthesis, but can only playback the training
sequences. To achieve better pose generalization, recent works adopt
a disentangled representation, which maps the points in different
poses to a canonical radiance field using inverse skinning [Li et al.
2022a, 2023; Peng et al. 2021a; Su et al. 2021; Wang et al. 2022b;
Weng et al. 2022]. For modeling the dynamic appearance details,
Neural Actors [Liu et al. 2021a] introduces a texture map as an ad-
ditional condition. In contrast to them, Zheng et al. [2022b] present
a structured local representation, where the radiance field of dy-
namic characters is assembled by a set of local ones, similarly to
MVP [Lombardi et al. 2021]. DANBO [Su et al. 2022] employs a
part-based volumetric representation defined by the skeleton struc-
ture using graph neural networks. Recently, Remelli et al. [2022]
combine localized volumetric primitives with the dense signal from
image observations, allowing faithful synthesis of appearance de-
tails like cloth wrinkles. However, their avatars can only be driven
by the same person in the same attire due to its requirement of
driving views. In contrast, our method takes as input solely the pose
parameters and the expression coefficients no matter where they
come from, thus our avatar can be driven by another person or other
signal sources. Concurrent to us, TotalSelfScan [Dong et al. 2022b]
reconstructs a full-body model from self-portrait videos of faces,
hands, and bodies, but it can only produce articulated body motions
and fails to synthesize photo-realistic dynamic appearance.
Face Avatars. Similar to human bodies, face avatar techniques
have also undergone significant advancements. The seminal work
dating back to 1999 built the first 3D morphable model, enabling
representation of facial shapes by embedding different identities
and expressions into low-dimensional PCA spaces [Blanz and Vetter
1999]. To model complex deformations and textures, researchers
have exploited more advanced modeling tools, such as multi-linear
models [Cao et al. 2014; Vlasic et al. 2006], nonlinear models [Guo
et al. 2021a; Zheng et al. 2022c] and the articulated control of expres-
sion [Li et al. 2017]. Recent methods further recover high-frequency
deformations of expressions by learning additional displacement
maps on top of the base mesh model [Danecek et al. 2022; Feng
et al. 2021; Grassal et al. 2022]. Moreover, some researchers propose
reconstructing facial avatars with remarkable quality for immersive
telepresence based on dense multiview capture systems [Chu et al.
2020; Lombardi et al. 2018; Ma et al. 2021a; Wang et al. 2023].
Since the debut of implicit representations like DeepSDF [Park
et al. 2019] or NeRF [Mildenhall et al. 2020], it becomes an growing
trend to model 3D faces or heads in an implicit fashion. Building
upon neural implicit functions, Yenamandra et al. [2021] developed
the first deep implicit 3D morphable model of full heads including
faces and hairs. Similarly, Hong et al. [2021] adopt NeRF to create a
parametric head model that supports high-fidelity head image ren-
dering in real-time. However, these models focus on learning generic
head models using data from multiple subjects, often lacking per-
sonalized appearance details. To address this issue, NeRFace [Gafni
et al. 2021] proposes a personalized head avatar by taking expres-
sion coefficients as the additional inputs for the head NeRF, and
demonstrates state-of-the-art reenactment and rendering results.
IMAvatar [Zheng et al. 2022a] incorporates skinning fields with
an implicit morphing-based model, which allows better geometry
reconstruction and stronger generalization capability for novel ex-
pressions. Gao et al. [2022] bridge traditional mesh blendshapes with
voxel-based implicit fields, enabling fast construction of personal-
ized head NeRF models from monocular videos. These methods
typically require dense images or videos as input, and efforts have
been made to alleviate the reliance on large amounts of data [2022;
2023a; 2023b; 2022]. Some recent research works also propose to
replace the expression coefficients with other driving signals, such
as audio [Guo et al. 2021b] and gaze [Richard et al. 2021].
NeRF Acceleration. Numerous works have emerged with the
purpose of speeding up static NeRF using explicit data structures in-
cluding feature maps, voxels and tensors. For instance, DVGO [Sun
et al. 2022b] achieves fast convergence through an explicit repre-
sentation of a density voxel grid and a feature voxel grid. Plenox-
els [Fridovich-Keil et al. 2022] and PlenOctree [Yu et al. 2021] model
a scene through a hierarchical 3D grid with spherical harmonics,
which can realize an optimization with two orders of magnitude
faster than NeRF. DIVeR [Wu et al. 2022] accelerates volumetric
rendering by limiting ray marching to a fixed number of hits on the
ACM Trans. Graph., Vol. 42, No. 4, Article . Publication date: August 2023.


4
•
Zerong Zheng, Xiaochen Zhao, Hongwen Zhang, Boning Liu, and Yebin Liu
Fig. 2. Illustration of our compositional avatar representation. Our expressive avatar is composed of three parts, namely the major body, the hands and
the face. For clarity, we only illustrate the body representation here, and leave the other two in Figure 3 and Figure 4. The core of our body representation is a
set of structured local implicit fields, and we enhance their detail representation power by introducing an explicit dynamic feture patch for each field.
voxel grid. Hashing encoding [Müller et al. 2022] and tensor decom-
position [Chen et al. 2022b] are also used as compact representations
for NeRF acceleration. Similar techniques have also been applied
for dynamic scene rendering. For example, DeVRF [Liu et al. 2022]
enables fast non-rigid neural rendering with both 3D volumetric
and 4D voxel fields. TiNeuVox [Fang et al. 2022] represents scenes
with optimizable explicit data structures and accelerates radiance
fields modeling, while Wang et al. [2022d] extended PlenOctree
into free-view video rendering. Despite demonstrating significant
speedup in NeRF training and testing, most of these works can only
render static scenes or playback a dynamic sequence, making them
unsuitable for character animation settings.
In this paper, we propose a novel real-time rendering pipeline
based on deferred surface rendering. The philosophy behind our
design is similar to MobileNeRF [Chen et al. 2022a], which also
computes the pixel color in the image space rather than volume
rendering. However, MobileNeRF only works for static scenes be-
cause it represents the scene as a fixed triangle mesh. In contrast,
the topology of our avatar varies from pose to pose, and cannot be
modeled with a stationary mesh. Therefore, we extract the pose-
dependent geometry model on the fly via taking advantage of the
SDF definition and the parallelism in our representation. We further
disentangle geometry and appearance to reduce the computational
burden in geometry reconstruction. Although disentangling geom-
etry and appearance has been proposed for multi-view geometry
reconstruction [Yariv et al. 2020], we are the first to employ it for
real-time rendering. This requires us to accelerate the expensive
operation of sphere tracing, and we achieve this goal by caching
SDF values in an explicit volumetric grid.
3
AVATAR REPRESENTATION
This section discusses how we represent our expressive avatar. The
avatar is composed of three parts, namely the body, the hands and
the face. Considering their different characteristics in shape and
texture variations, we design different neural implicit representa-
tions for them. They all rely on the corresponding parametric mesh
templates, i.e., SMPL-X for the body [Pavlakos et al. 2019], MANO
for the hands [Romero et al. 2022] and Faceverse for the face [Wang
et al. 2022a], but these templates is leveraged in totally different
manners, as we will discuss in Section 3.1, 3.2 and 3.3. Finally, we
introduce the technique for combining all the parts into one final
avatar model in Section 3.4.
Notation. In the following text, we denote the part representation
with A∗(𝑠), where𝑠is the driving signal and the subscript “∗” can be
{“B”, “H”, “F”}, representing “body”, “hand” and “face”, respectively.
Accordingly, the driving signal 𝑠comes from body poses 𝜽, hand
poses 𝝓or facial expressions 𝝍. Each part representation consists of
two components, namely a geometry field G∗and a view-dependent
color field C∗:
A∗(𝑠) = {G∗(𝒑|𝑠), C∗(𝒑, 𝒗|𝑠)},
(1)
where 𝒑and 𝒗are the 3D point position and the viewing direction,
respectively. For ease of notation, we drop the dependency on view
directions when discussing the color fields in the upcoming sections.
ACM Trans. Graph., Vol. 42, No. 4, Article . Publication date: August 2023.


AvatarReX: Real-time Expressive Full-body Avatars
•
5
In our method, we represent the geometry field as a signed dis-
tance function (SDF), where the true surface is embedded as its
zero-level set {𝒑∈R3|G∗(𝒑|𝑠) = 0}. Note that we do not follow the
vanilla NeRF [Mildenhall et al. 2020] and most NeRF-based avatar
works [Peng et al. 2021a; Zheng et al. 2022b] that use one network
to simultaneously model the geometry (density) field and the color
field. Instead, we model them in a disentangled fashion and use
smaller network size for the geometry fields. Such a design is for the
purpose of real-time implementation as well as two-pass training,
as we will discussed in Section 4 & 5 .
3.1
Body Representation
We adopt structured local radiance fields [Zheng et al. 2022b] as
the representation of our body geometry field. Here we briefly
review its construction for completeness. Specifically, we pre-define
a set of nodes {¯𝒏𝑖}𝑁
𝑖=1 on the SMPL-X model [Pavlakos et al. 2019]
via farthest point sampling. Since the nodes are sampled from the
SMPL-X model, each of them has associated skinning weights, thus
can be driven by the skeleton. Furthermore, we allow the nodes to
have their own residual movements Δ𝒏𝑖to represent the non-rigid
deformation of garments.
Around each node, we construct a local implicit field centered at
it. Take the geometry field GB as an example. For each node, we
define a function G𝑖in a local space around it, and use a tiny MLP to
represent this function. This MLP takes as input a coordinate in the
local space of node 𝑖and outputs a high-dimensional feature vector,
which will be blended with the outputs from other local MLPs and
finally decoded into an SDF value. Formally, given any point 𝒑∈R3
in the posed space of pose 𝜽, we first calculate its coordinate in the
local space of node 𝑖as:
𝒑𝑖= T−1𝒑−(¯𝒏𝑖+ Δ𝒏𝑖) ,
(2)
where T is the skinning matrix computed from the pose parameter
𝜽using linear blending skinning and 𝒏𝑖is the position of node 𝑖in
the posed space. After that, we feed it into the local network G𝑖and
blend the feature vectors produced by all the local MLPs:
𝒇=
Í𝑤𝑖G𝑖(𝒑𝑖, 𝒆𝑖)
Í𝑤𝑖
,
(3)
where 𝒆𝑖is a dynamic detail embedding predicted from the pose
parameters and models the fine-grain deformations that cannot
be represented by node movements. The blending weight 𝑤𝑖is
calculated as:
𝑤𝑖= max
(
exp
 
−∥𝒑−𝒏𝑖∥2
2
2𝜎2
!
−𝜖, 0
)
,
(4)
where 𝜎and 𝜖are hyperparameters controlling the influence radius
of the local networks. The blended feature 𝒇is fed into an additional
MLP Gblending to compute the SDF value of 𝒑𝑖:
GB(𝒑|𝜽) = Gblending(𝒇).
(5)
Dynamic Feature Patch. The color field of our body representa-
tion can be modeled in a similar way to the geometry field, i.e., with a
set of local MLPs {C𝑖} and a blending MLP Cblending. However, due
to the low-frequency bias [Tancik et al. 2020], the local MLPs {C𝑖}
are not powerful enough to represent the high-frequency details like
the cloth wrinkles and texture patterns. To address this limitation,
Fig. 3. Hand representation. We directly use the SDF from the parametric
template as the geometry field of our hand representation, and learn an
MLP to model the color field in the canonical space.
we introduce a dynamic feature patch for each local function of the
body color field. Compared to purely implicit representation, an ex-
plicit feature patch contains more spatial information and provides
stronger capability to store the information about high-frequency
local details [Liu et al. 2021a]. The feature patch, denoted as F𝑖, is
regressed by a tiny convolution network from the dynamic detail
embedding 𝒆𝑖and a 2D learnable positional encoding, as illustrated
in Figure 2. Given the local point position 𝒑𝑖, we project it onto the
feature patch:
𝒖𝑖= Π𝑖𝒑𝑖,
(6)
where Π𝑖∈R2×3 is the projection matrix used for projecting 3D
points along a specific direction. Here we pre-compute the project-
ing direction by averaging the normal orientations of the SMPL-X
vertices that locate nearby node 𝑖. After that, we query for the
feature vector at 𝒖𝑖through bilinear interpolation:
𝒇𝑖= Bilinear(F𝑖, 𝒖𝑖).
(7)
The interpolated feature vector is finally taken as an additional input
by the local function C𝑖to produce the final color value:
𝒇
′ =
Í𝑤𝑖C𝑖(𝒑𝑖, 𝒆𝑖,𝒇𝑖)
Í𝑤𝑖
,
CB(𝒑|𝜽) = Cblending(𝒇
′).
(8)
As shown in Section 6.3, the proposed dynamic feature patches
allow our color networks to learn more appearance details for the
major body.
3.2
Hand Representation
Unlike the major body with clothing, hands show limited variations
in shape and topology. Therefore, we directly use the surface of a
parametric hand template to construct the geometry field of the
hand, thus alleviating the need for learning complex articulated
motion of fingers. Here we use MANO [Romero et al. 2022] as the
base hand representation. For any spatial point 𝒑∈R3 in hand
pose 𝝓, we project it onto the MANO mesh by first calculating its
barycentric projection on each triangle face of the MANO surface
and then finding the nearest one. Mathematically, this procedure
ACM Trans. Graph., Vol. 42, No. 4, Article . Publication date: August 2023.


6
•
Zerong Zheng, Xiaochen Zhao, Hongwen Zhang, Boning Liu, and Yebin Liu
can be formulated as:
(𝑢∗, 𝑣∗,𝑤∗, F∗) = arg min
𝑢,𝑣,𝑤,F ||𝒑−Barycentric(F,𝑢, 𝑣,𝑤)||2
2,
𝑠.𝑡.,
0 ≤𝑢, 𝑣,𝑤≤1,
𝑢+ 𝑣+ 𝑤= 1
(9)
where F is a triangle of the MANO mesh and Barycentric(. . .) is
the barycentric interpolation function. Using the barycentric coor-
dinates (𝑢∗, 𝑣∗,𝑤∗) and the interpolation function, we determine
the nearest point of 𝒑on the MANO mesh, which we denoted as
𝒎np. Similarly, we can compute its normal direction 𝒏np through
barycentric interpolation. The SDF value of 𝒑can be finally calcu-
lated as:
GH(𝒑|𝝓) =

||𝒑−𝒎np||2,
𝒏⊤np
 𝒑−𝒎np
 ≥0
−||𝒑−𝒎np||2,
𝒏⊤np
 𝒑−𝒎np
 < 0
.
(10)
To model the color field of the hand, we turn to a neural per-
spective. We first calculate the canonical position of 𝒎np via in-
terpolating the position of F in the canonical pose according to
the barycentric coordinate. The interpolated result ¯𝒎np, together
with the normal direction in posed space 𝒏np, the signed distance
SDF(𝒑) and the hand pose 𝝓, is fed into an MLP to produce the
color value:
CH(𝒑|𝝓) = C
′
H
 ¯𝒎np, 𝒏np, SDF(𝒑), 𝝓 ,
(11)
where C
′
H denotes the MLP network. In this way, our method is
able to model the pose-dependent appearance of hands without the
burden of learning complex hand motions. Figure 3 illustrates our
hand representation.
3.3
Face Representation
Compared to the body and the hands, representing the face is more
challenging as humans are social animals that rely on facial expres-
sions to read and convey emotions. As a result, we need to achieve
both photo-realistic synthesis and accurate expression control in
order to overcome the well-known uncanny valley. To this end, we
propose to combine the the rendering power of NeRF and the prior
knowledge from the facial morphable model [Wang et al. 2022a].
Given the expression coefficients 𝝍, we first compute the corre-
sponding 3D facial model. The model is an extremely coarse approx-
imation of the real face, but it provides structural information about
the specific expression. To utilize this structural knowledge in an
efficient manner, we take inspiration from EG3D [Chan et al. 2022]
and propose to learn a triplane-alike facial avatar representation.
Specifically, we render the model from its front view and two side
views using orthogonal projection, as illustrated in Figure 4. The
rendered images are passed through three convolutional neural en-
coders, which extract the corresponding feature tri-planes denoted
as {Ffront, Fleft, Fright}. Given a spatial point 𝒑∈R3, we project
it onto the feature tri-planes and retrieve its pixel-aligned feature
vectors through bilinear interpolation:
𝒇𝑣= Bilinear(F𝑣, Π𝑣(𝒑)),
(12)
where Π𝑣∈R2×3 is the projection matrix and the subscript 𝑣∈
{“front”, “left”, “right”} denotes the projection direction. The fea-
ture vectors, together with the point coordinate, are fed into an MLP
Fig. 4. Face representation. We condition NeRF on the orthogonal views
of a 3D morphable model, which provides structural prior of the face and
controllability over expressions.
to produce the sign distance of 𝒑:
GF(𝒑|𝝍) = G
′
F(𝒑,𝒇front,𝒇left,𝒇right),
(13)
where G
′
F is an MLP network. The color of 𝒑is predicted in a similar
way using another set of convolutional encoders and another MLP.
Previous works on NeRF-based facial avatar typically use pure
MLPs as the network architecture and take the global expression
coefficients as the network condition [Gafni et al. 2021; Zheng et al.
2022a]. Compared to them, the explicit feature tri-planes allow us to
keep the MLP decoder as light-weight as possible, thus reducing the
computational cost of neural rendering. Furthermore, the feature
tri-planes provide spatially varying conditioning for the 3D space,
which has stronger power in representing appearance details than
a global expression condition.
3.4
Composition
With all the necessary building blocks at hand, we can now introduce
how we combine different body parts into an expressive avatar.
There are two key technical designs that assist us towards this goal.
One is the usage of SDF, which has a unified, unambiguous definition
across different parts. The other one is that our hand representation
and face representation are tightly coupled with their underlying
parametric templates, which provide correspondences for us to
assemble them with the body. Using these correspondences, we
pre-compute the transformation between the body space and the
hand/face space. We also pre-define the blending weights on the
SMPL-X mesh, as shown in Figure 2. Given a point 𝒑in the body
posed space, we first project it onto the SMPL-X mesh and query
the blending weight 𝜔. Without loss of generality, let’s say the point
falls on the left hand. Then we query its SDF value and color in
both the body representation and face representation, which we
denote as 𝑠B, 𝒄B, 𝑠H and 𝒄H. The final SDF value and color for 𝒑is
ACM Trans. Graph., Vol. 42, No. 4, Article . Publication date: August 2023.


AvatarReX: Real-time Expressive Full-body Avatars
•
7
Fig. 5. Illustration of our real-time rendering pipeline. Our rendering pipeline firstly reconstructs the geometry model in the form of an SDF volume,
from which we render a point map to query the pixel colors given a specific viewpoint.
computed as:
𝑠=
 𝜔𝑠H + (1 −𝜔)𝑠B,
if −0.05 < 𝑠H < 0.025
𝑠B,
otherwise
.
(14)
𝒄=
 𝜔𝒄H + (1 −𝜔)𝒄B,
if −0.05 < 𝑠H < 0.025
𝒄B,
otherwise
.
(15)
In this way, we can obtain the final avatar given some specific body
poses, hand poses and facial expressions.
4
REAL-TIME ANIMATION AND RENDERING
Since our avatar representation is based on NeRF rather than meshes,
it cannot be sent to traditional graphics pipelines for efficient ren-
dering. In fact, efficient rendering of NeRF is a difficult problem
on its own, and has attracted significant research interest since the
debut of NeRF [Chen et al. 2022a; Liu et al. 2022; Müller et al. 2022;
Reiser et al. 2021; Yu et al. 2021]. However, current NeRF accelera-
tion techniques mostly focus on static scenes or dynamic sequence
playback, and rely on specific data structures that cannot be easily
adapted for avatar animation. Therefore, we design a dedicated de-
ferred surface rendering pipeline for our avatar representation. Our
deferred surface rendering consists of three steps, namely geometry
reconstruction, point map rendering and pixel shading, as illustrated
in Figure 5 and described in the following.
Step I. Geometry Reconstruction. In the first step of our de-
ferred rendering pipeline, we reconstruct the complete geometry
model in the form of an SDF volume. Note that this step is agnostic
to the viewing camera. For the reason of computational efficiency,
we do not directly infer a high-resolution SDF volume using the full
geometry field in Equantion (14). Instead, we follow a coarse-to-fine
scheme: we firstly infer only the body geometry field with a low-
resolution volume, and then update the hands and the face in the
upsampled one.
Specifically, we first compute the bounding box from the node
positions in the body representation. At the center of the bounding
box, we create a volume grid with a resolution of 128×128×128,
where the side length of each voxel is 2 cm. Such a resolution is
not fine enough for representing thin structures like fingers, but
sufficient for other major body parts. Recall that in our body repre-
sentation in Section 3.1, a local network G𝑖only influences a small
local space around node 𝑖. Based on this property, we directly collect
the voxels that fall into the influence space of each node, and pass
them through the corresponding local networks in parallel. Since
the influence radiuses of all local networks are identical, the voxel
numbers assigned to the local networks are similar, which is benefi-
cial for maximizing parallelism. The outputs of the local networks
are then gathered and blended following Equation (3), and finally
decoded to SDF values.
After that, we upsample the SDF volume by a factor of 4, and
refine the hands and the face. To this end, we firstly compute the
bounding boxes for both hands and the face, and collect the voxels
that locate inside the boxes. Then we query the hand geometry
field or the face geometry field for these voxels, depending on the
bounding boxes they belong to. The final SDF values of these voxels
is obtained using the method described in Section 3.4.
Step II. Point Map Rendering. The second step of our render-
ing pipeline is to raycast the SDF volume to extract views of the
implicit surface [Izadi et al. 2011]. Given the camera origin and view-
ing direction, the raycasting operation traverses the SDF volume
along camera rays and extracts the intersection between the rays
and the zero-crossing surface for each pixel. The intersection point
is then recorded as a 2D point map for next step.
Step III. Pixel Shading. In the final step of our rendering pipeline,
we compute the pixel colors of the point map to obtain the final
rendering results. Similar to geometry reconstruction, we first query
the body color field for all the points in the point map and utilize the
“local influence” property of the local MLPs to parallelize network
queries. After that, we query the face color field and the hand color
field to update the pixels of the hands and the face, as described
in Section 3.4. This produces the final image that corresponds to
the given body pose, hand pose, facial expression and view point,
marking the end of our rendering pipeline.
Most NeRF-based methods synthesize images through volume
rendering, which samples millions of points along camera rays for
ACM Trans. Graph., Vol. 42, No. 4, Article . Publication date: August 2023.


8
•
Zerong Zheng, Xiaochen Zhao, Hongwen Zhang, Boning Liu, and Yebin Liu
network evaluation. In contrast, we design a deferred surface ren-
dering pipeline by taking advantage of the implicit surface defini-
tion and the disentanglement of geometry and appearance [Sun
et al. 2022a]. Our pipeline first stores geometry reconstruction in
an explicit grid and then use it to cull unnecessary points for color
inference as much as possible. In this way, we significantly speed up
the rendering process of our expressive avatar and finally achieve
real-time performance using custom CUDA kernels and modern
inference engines like NVIDIA TensorRT. Note that this is only
possible when the surface prediction is reliable. In the next section,
we will discuss how we train the network from scratch to acquire
the surface, and how we use surface rendering to boost network
learning.
5
MODEL TRAINING
In this section, we provide technical details about how we train
our expressive avatars. We first present our novel two-pass training
strategy in Section 5.1. We then shortly describe our capture setup
and the data pre-processing pipeline, followed by the full training
procedure (Section 5.2)
5.1
Network Training Strategy
Similar to other NeRF-based methods, we can train our networks by
sampling image pixels, shooting camera rays, performing volume
rendering and penalizing the error between the rendered colors and
the ground-truth ones [Mildenhall et al. 2020]. However, we empiri-
cally find that the results produced by such a training strategy are
not satisfactory enough: the networks trained with this scheme tend
to synthesize over-smoothed images and fail to recover dynamic
appearance details like the texture patterns on the garments. This is
mainly because volume rendering relies on dense network evalua-
tion along camera rays, which limits the number of pixel queries in
one forward pass. Consequently, we could only apply pixel-wise su-
pervision on sparse pixels during network training. In addition, this
training strategy is based on volume rendering, rather than surface
rendering that we use for real-time animation. The gap between
training and testing further deteriorates the rendering quality of our
real-time system. To address these issues, we propose a two-pass
training strategy. It consists of two stages, namely topology-free
training and topology-based finetuning, as illustrated in Figure 6
and elaborated in the following.
Pass I. Topology-free training. In this stage we assume no
prior knowledge about the avatar topology and directly train the
full network with volume rendering. To this end, we follow the
practice of [Yariv et al. 2021] and convert the SDF into a density
function using:
𝜎(𝒑) = 1
𝛾Φ𝛾(−G∗(𝒑)),
(16)
where Φ𝛾(·) is the Cumulative Distribution Function (CDF) of the
Laplace distribution with zero mean, and its scale 𝛾is a learnable
hyperparameter. This transformation links the density in neural
radiance fields with our geometry definition, allowing us to optimize
the avatar SDF using neural volume rendering. At each iteration of
network optimization, we randomly fetch a batch of frames, from
which we randomly sample a fixed number of pixels to construct
(a) Topology-free training.
(b) Topology-based finetuning.
Fig. 6. Illustration of the two-pass training strategy. In the topology-
free training stage, the networks learn the avatar geometry from scratch
with volume rendering on sparse pixels. Then the topology-based finetuning
stage utilizes the learned geometry to increase the number of pixel evalua-
tions in one forward pass, allowing us to apply structural supervision with
a patch-level perceptual loss.
the training loss. The loss is defined as:
LI =Lrgb + 𝜆maskLmask + 𝜆EikonalLEikonal+
𝜆nodeLnode + 𝜆ebdLebd + 𝜆KLLKL,
(17)
where Lrgb measures the MSE between the rendered and true pixel
colors, Lmask is an MAE loss supervising the occupancy values of
the rendered pixels, LEikonal is the Eikonal loss encouraging the ge-
ometry fields to approximate a true signed distance function [Yariv
et al. 2021], Lnode, Lebd and LKL are the regularization losses in-
herited from [Zheng et al. 2022b]. To stabilize network training
and obtain consistent performance for different subjects, we do not
optimize 𝛾in Equation (16) during the training process. Instead, we
manually set its value as:
𝛾(𝑛) = 𝛾0 + 𝛾1 · max{0, (1 −𝑛/𝑁)},
(18)
where 𝑛is the iteration steps, while 𝛾0 = 5 × 10−4, 𝛾0 = 0.02
and 𝑁= 100000 are hyperparameters controlling how 𝛾varies as
training iterates.
Pass II. Topology-based finetuning. After the first stage of
training, we observe the estimate of the avatar shape is sufficiently
reliable although the texture is not clear enough. Based on this
observation, we design a topology-based finetuning strategy to
finetune the color fields in our avatar while keeping the geometry
branches fixed. Specifically, we sample a set of patches with the
size of 𝐻× 𝐻on a training frame, and compute the corresponding
camera locations and ray directions. Then we leverage ray marching
to locate the nearest surface intersection between the rays and the
underlying implicit surface, similar to the first two steps in our
real-time rendering pipeline. The intersection points are sent to the
color networks to query their RGB values, which we take as the
ACM Trans. Graph., Vol. 42, No. 4, Article . Publication date: August 2023.


AvatarReX: Real-time Expressive Full-body Avatars
•
9
pixel color prediction to construct the training loss. Different from
the first stage, the training loss in this stage is defined as:
LII = LMSE + 𝜆LPIPSLLPIPS,
(19)
where LMSE is a simple L2 loss to match pixel-wise appearance
with the ground-truth and LLPIPS is a perceptual loss applied on
patch level, which provides stronger supervision on high-frequency
appearance details as shown in Figure 17. We choose VGG as the
backbone of LPIPS loss.
Note that we only apply the training loss on the ray-surface inter-
section points; we do not back-propagate the loss gradient through
the ray marching process. Compared to the previous stage where
dense point samples are required for pixel color computation, the
topology-based finetuning stage predicts pixel colors with a much
smaller number of points to be evaluated. This advantage increases
the maximum number of pixel evaluations in one forward pass, thus
enabling perceptual supervision on image patches. Furthermore,
this finetuning stage is built upon surface rendering, similar to the
real-time animation system in Section 4. As a result, it closes the
gap between training and testing.
One may ask why not apply perceptual loss in the first training
pass based on volume rendering. In fact, this is possible, as done in
HumanNeRF [Weng et al. 2022]. However, due to the complexity of
our network and the memory limits of GPUs, we can only render 400
pixels in one forward pass with volume rendering. Consequently,
the patch-level supervision can only be applied on a small patch
with a resolution around 20×20, which we found too small to con-
tain any structural information. In contrast, topology-based surface
rendering allows us to render a larger patch at 128×128 resolution,
enabling stronger supervision on structural accuracy.
5.2
Data Capture and Processing
5.2.1
Data Capture. We use two multi-camera capture systems in
this work, one for the full body and the other for the face. The body
capture system consists of 16 synchronized cameras, each capable
of producing 1500×2048 images. The cameras are evenly distributed
around the yaw axis in order to cover the 360-degree view point
of the body. For the face capture system, we use 6 synchronized
cameras that focus on the frontal face, spanning about 130 degrees
horizontally. The image resolution of our face capture system is also
1500×2048.
We collect data from 4 subjects, two males and one female in
two sets of clothing. For each subject, we use the full-body capture
system to collect video data of some casual motions with neutral
face expression, which will be used to train the body avatar and the
hand avatar. Each captured sequence is about 2000 frames in length.
To collect training data for face avatar, we use the face system to
capture sequences of 1500-2000 frames in length, which include a
range of expressions and natural reading sequences. Note that we do
not rely on either pre-scanned templates or non-rigid mesh tracking
to learn the avatar geometry, which is a departure from existing
work [Bagautdinov et al. 2021; Habermann et al. 2021; Remelli et al.
2022]
Fig. 7. Effect of fitting refinement. Compared to the initial results (left),
the refinement step can produce better alignment between the SMPL-X’s
arms and their image observations (right).
(a) Without tone mapping.
(b) With tone mapping.
Fig. 8. Effects of the tone mapping network. Our tone mapping net-
works addresses the skin tone difference between body data and face data,
and successfully harmonizes the composition results.
5.2.2
Data Pre-processing. To train our networks, we need to obtain
SMPL-X fitting for every frame of the full-body sequence and Face-
verse fitting for both the full-body sequence and the face sequence.
For the former purpose, we directly use off-the-shelf tools [Pavlakos
et al. 2019; Zhang et al. 2023b]. However, the fitting results obtained
using such a method are not accurate enough due to the sparseness
of keypoints and inevitable detection errors. Therefore, we regard
the results as the initial fitting and design a refinement step based on
inverse rendering. Specifically, we use Background Matting v2 [Lin
et al. 2021] to extract the foreground body segmentation and render
the silhouette of SMPL-X model with a differentiable rasterizer [Liu
et al. 2019a]. Then we penalize the inconsistency between them
to optimize both the shape and pose parameters for SMPL-X. As
shown in Figure 7, the refinement step leads to better alignment
between the SMPL-X model and the image observation. Please see
the appendix for more details.
To register Faceverse, we directly utilize the open-sourced tool
provided by Wang et al. [2022a]. We also apply Background Matting
V2 [Lin et al. 2021] for foreground segmentation.
5.2.3
Full training procedure. After collecting the training data for
a specific person, we first use the face data to train the networks
for face representation with our two-pass training strategy. Then
we fix the face networks, and jointly train the body and the hand
networks using the body data. This training step also follows the
two-pass strategy. To address the color tone difference between the
ACM Trans. Graph., Vol. 42, No. 4, Article . Publication date: August 2023.


10
•
Zerong Zheng, Xiaochen Zhao, Hongwen Zhang, Boning Liu, and Yebin Liu
Fig. 9. Qualitative results on novel pose synthesis. We train our network for four identities and show the novel pose synthesis results, where two different
subjects perform the same motions and expressions.
ACM Trans. Graph., Vol. 42, No. 4, Article . Publication date: August 2023.
