Title: GroomCap: High-Fidelity Prior-Free Hair Capture

GroomCap: High-Fidelity Prior-Free Hair Capture
YUXIAO ZHOU, ETH Zurich, Switzerland
MENGLEI CHAI, Google Inc., United States of America
DAOYE WANG, Google Inc., Switzerland
SEBASTIAN WINBERG, Google Inc., Switzerland
ERROLL WOOD, Google Inc., United Kindom
KRIPASINDHU SARKAR, Google Inc., Switzerland
MARKUS GROSS, ETH Zurich, Switzerland
THABO BEELER, Google Inc., Switzerland
Fig. 1. GroomCap reconstructs high-fidelity hair geometry across a diverse array of hairstyles. For each result, we show one input view on the left,
alongside a rendering of the reconstructed hair model from the same view on the right. A pre-defined material is used to better visualize geometric details.
Despite recent advances in multi-view hair reconstruction, achieving strand-
level precision remains a significant challenge due to inherent limitations in
existing capture pipelines. We introduce GroomCap, a novel multi-view hair
capture method that reconstructs faithful and high-fidelity hair geometry
without relying on external data priors. To address the limitations of conven-
tional reconstruction algorithms, we propose a neural implicit representation
for hair volume that encodes high-resolution 3D orientation and occupancy
from input views. This implicit hair volume is trained with a new volumetric
3D orientation rendering algorithm, coupled with 2D orientation distribution
supervision, to effectively prevent the loss of structural information caused
Authors’ addresses: Yuxiao Zhou, ETH Zurich, Switzerland, yuxiao.zhou@inf.ethz.
ch; Menglei Chai, Google Inc., United States of America, mengleichai@google.com;
Daoye Wang, Google Inc., Switzerland, daoye@google.com; Sebastian Winberg, Google
Inc., Switzerland, winbergs@google.com; Erroll Wood, Google Inc., United Kindom,
errollw@google.com; Kripasindhu Sarkar, Google Inc., Switzerland, krsarkar@google.
com; Markus Gross, ETH Zurich, Switzerland, grossm@inf.ethz.ch; Thabo Beeler,
Google Inc., Switzerland, tbeeler@google.com.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s).
© 2024 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
0730-0301/2024/12-ART254
https://doi.org/10.1145/3687768
by undesired orientation blending. We further propose a Gaussian-based
hair optimization strategy to refine the traced hair strands with a novel
chained Gaussian representation, utilizing direct photometric supervision
from images. Our results demonstrate that GroomCap is able to capture
high-quality hair geometries that are not only more precise and detailed
than existing methods but also versatile enough for a range of applications.
CCS Concepts: • Computing methodologies →Parametric curve and
surface models.
Additional Key Words and Phrases: Strand-level hair modeling, multi-view
reconstruction
ACM Reference Format:
Yuxiao Zhou, Menglei Chai, Daoye Wang, Sebastian Winberg, Erroll Wood,
Kripasindhu Sarkar, Markus Gross, and Thabo Beeler. 2024. GroomCap:
High-Fidelity Prior-Free Hair Capture. ACM Trans. Graph. 43, 6, Article 254
(December 2024), 15 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3687768
1
INTRODUCTION
Hairstyles are not merely aesthetic decorations; they serve as a
profound expression of individual and cultural identity that shapes
our perception of others. In the digital realm, realistic hair plays a
crucial role in virtual reality, gaming, and for digital doubles, where
visual authenticity is paramount. Despite ongoing efforts in human
ACM Trans. Graph., Vol. 43, No. 6, Article 254. Publication date: December 2024.
arXiv:2409.00831v4  [cs.GR]  3 Apr 2025


254:2
•
Yuxiao Zhou, Menglei Chai, Daoye Wang, Sebastian Winberg, Erroll Wood, Kripasindhu Sarkar, Markus Gross, and Thabo Beeler
digitization, accurate reconstruction of strand-level hair geometry
from images remains a formidable and unique challenge. This com-
plexity arises from the detailed, layered, and intertwined structures
of hair, alongside its natural variability in style, texture, and material,
all of which significantly complicate the capture process.
Over the past decades, multi-view hair reconstruction has seen
encouraging progress. Well before the advent of neural networks,
traditional capture pipelines typically reconstruct the visible exterior
of hair and compute a 3D orientation field using 2D estimates from
each view, followed by completing the 3D structure of the entire
hair volume to generate the final strands. Despite the promising
results, the faithfulness and fidelity of the reconstructed hair are
largely compromised by key limitations of these pipelines: reliance
on explicit point clouds and orientation projections may overlook
critical details in regions of uncertainty and overlapping strands;
simple volume completion like diffusion or ribbon conversion often
produces overly smoothed hair and may only work effectively on
distinct wisp structures; and the final strand extraction further
deviates the result from the input.
To address these challenges, recent methods have sought to
leverage data-driven solutions, incorporating priors learned from
synthetic data into hair capture pipelines. While prior-based recon-
struction has seen notable success in other human components, such
as faces, hands, and bodies, its application to hair remains challeng-
ing for two primary factors. First, the scarcity of ground-truth hair
data necessitates large-scale synthetic assets, which are not only
costly to collect at scale but also suffer from an inevitable gap to real-
world examples. Second, due to the extreme diversity and variability
of hair, even the most extensive hair libraries cannot adequately
cover the precise details of specific subjects. Consequently, despite
more visually pleasing results, these prior-based approaches often
yield highly regularized and flattened geometries that struggle to
capture structural details outside the training set.
Data priors are not a cure-all. Simply plugging prior models into
capture pipelines, without addressing the underlying algorithmic
limitations, still results in challenges that hinder us from achieving
high-quality hair geometry capture. In this work, we take a more
fundamental look at the problem and push the boundaries of high-
quality hair capture without relying on any data priors.
By examining existing capture pipelines, we identify several key
issues: 1) Representing hair as discrete exterior surfaces or explicit
volumes often leads to a significant loss of spatial information, such
as rich structural details and natural variations in occupancy. 2) 3D
hair structure is inferred from image-based orientation estimation,
where each pixel is formed from superposing numerous strands with
dramatically different directions. However, the common practice of
aggregating them into a single orientation angle discards crucial
structural information necessary for accurate recovery. 3) Even with
initially accurate projected 3D structures, the quality of the hair
geometry tends to degrade after volume completion and strand
tracing, resulting in poor spatial distribution, missing local details,
inconsistent boundaries, and unnatural curvatures.
In this work, we introduce GroomCap, a novel multi-view hair
capture pipeline aimed at reconstructing high-fidelity and strand-
level accurate hair geometry without external data priors. Our
method incorporates several major technical innovations leading to
unprecedented performance, versatility, and robustness. Firstly, we
propose a neural implicit representation for volumetric hair, encod-
ing 3D orientation and occupancy from input views. Compared to
exterior surfaces or explicit volumes, our implicit hair volume enjoys
greater accuracy, expressiveness, and memory-efficiency. Secondly,
we train our hair volume model to effectively capture the complete
hair structure. To achieve this, we develop a new volumetric 3D
orientation rendering algorithm, where orientation integration is
performed along each ray, maintaining all overlapping hair struc-
tures without blending. Correspondingly, we revisit 2D orientation
estimation to estimate a per-pixel orientation distribution as the train-
ing supervision, rather than a single orientation angle. Finally, we
introduce Gaussian-based hair optimization, applied to initial hair
strands traced from the volume, to improve their faithfulness and
fidelity through direct photometric supervision from input images.
The key ingredient is a new chained hair Gaussian representation,
featuring carefully tailored geometry and appearance parameters,
along with a dynamic splitting and pruning mechanism.
Altogether, GroomCap effectively captures accurate and high-
fidelity dense hair models for a diverse range of hairstyles, using
the same pipeline and parameters for all of them. The resulting
strand geometries are consistently natural and guaranteed to be
scalp-rooted, thus supporting various editing applications, including
re-rendering, physics-based animation, and interactive grooming.
2
RELATED WORK
2.1
Hair Capture without Data Prior
Multi-view hair capture is of great interest to both research and
industry communities, in attempts to digitize 3D hair without in-
volving laborious artistic authoring. Early efforts [Paris et al. 2004;
Wei et al. 2005] construct visual hulls to constrain the hair volume
and estimate 3D hair orientations that are consistent across views.
[Paris et al. 2008] proposes a system that is capable of reconstruct-
ing exterior strand positions and growing strands within diffused
orientation volumes. [Luo et al. 2012, 2013b] introduce multi-view
stereo methods for reconstructing detailed hair surfaces using 2D
orientation fields. Following that, [Luo et al. 2013a] proposes a
structure-aware hair capture method that incorporates structural
priors to predict ribbon connectivity for capturing hair wisp struc-
tures. Focusing on capturing sparse outer strand segments instead
of complete hairstyles, [Jakob et al. 2009] detects accurate hair fibers
with shallow depth of field captures. [Nam et al. 2019] introduces
line-based PatchMatch multi-view stereo for hair, which is further
improved by [Sun et al. 2021] to support hair inverse rendering.
Besides RGB images, other imaging modalities have also been
investigated, such as RGB-D [Zhang et al. 2018] and thermal imaging
[Herrera et al. 2012]. Recently, [Shen et al. 2023] achieves high-
quality hair reconstructions by leveraging computed tomography
(CT) scans to obtain inner strand structures. However, it is unsuitable
for use on live human subjects due to the large exposure of X-rays.
Instead of strand-based geometry, some recent methods [Rosu
et al. 2022a; Wang et al. 2023, 2022] implicitly reconstruct hair in
volumetric representations. Despite achieving great visual quality,
their primary focus is on hair image synthesis for novel views or
motions, rather than capturing precise strand geometry itself.
ACM Trans. Graph., Vol. 43, No. 6, Article 254. Publication date: December 2024.


GroomCap: High-Fidelity Prior-Free Hair Capture
•
254:3
2.2
Model-Based Hair Capture
Data priors start to gain traction in single-view [Chai et al. 2015,
2016, 2013, 2012; Hu et al. 2015] or sparse-view hair modeling [Zhang
et al. 2017] to address the inherent challenges of these highly ill-
posed problems. Early works [Chai et al. 2016; Hu et al. 2015] focus
on matching and retrieving the closest dataset items to the input
views as the foundation for further fitting. More recently, neural-
based approaches become dominant the field, offering improved
accuracy and robustness. For example, [Zhou et al. 2018] trains
a convolutional neural network to infer geometry encoding from
input images. [Saito et al. 2018] develops a volumetric variational
autoencoder for generating hair conditioned on the input image.
[Yang et al. 2019] infer 3D shape and motion from monocular videos
for dynamic hair capture. [Wu et al. 2022] trains a voxel-aligned
implicit function to infer 3D volumetric information from the image.
[Zheng et al. 2023] proposes inferring 2D depth and orientation
maps before predicting 3D geometry. [Kuang et al. 2022] extends
these techniques to handle sparse view inputs.
In the context of dense multi-view hair capture, early efforts adopt
data priors to enhance reconstruction robustness with physics-based
strand priors [Hu et al. 2014a] or address the specific challenge of
braid reconstruction with pre-defined prior models on braid patterns
[Hu et al. 2014b]. More recently, researchers have begun to integrate
data priors more deeply into hair capture pipelines. [Sklyarova et al.
2023] employs a surface-based representation for the coarse shape
of the hair volume and reconstructs hair strands as a geometry
texture in a prior-guided manner. [Wu et al. 2024] combines data
priors for predicting interior structure with conventional patch-
based multi-view optimization for exterior reconstruction, achieving
state-of-the-art results.
2.3
Preliminaries
Neural implicit fields. Neural implicit fields leverage neural net-
works to represent 3D scenes. In the groundbreaking work of NeRF
[Mildenhall et al. 2020], a multi-layer perceptron (MLP) model is
adopted to predict volume density and radiance for any 3D point. Us-
ing this MLP, each pixel can be rendered through alpha-blending the
radiance of sample points along the ray, akin to classical volume ren-
dering techniques. This allows for the synthesis of arbitrary views
by rendering all rays originating from a virtual camera. The model
itself is trained on multi-view images, adhering to the synthesis-and-
comparison paradigm. Our method builds upon the original NeRF
model, extending its capabilities to 3D hair structure reasoning.
3D Gaussian splatting. 3D Gaussian splatting (3DGS) [Kerbl et al.
2023] is a recent technique that represents a scene using anisotropic
3D Gaussians. Each Gaussian is defined by a set of parameters,
including position, covariance matrix, opacity, and color. These
Gaussians can be rendered differentiably using the splatting method
and are trained with supervision from color images. While 3DGS is
effective at reproducing visual appearance, the underlying geometry
formed by these Guassians has been less explored. In this paper,
we render hair strands as chained Gaussians, employing pixel-
wise supervision. Additionally, we propose a novel fomulation that
enforces geometric constraints during the optimization.
Fig. 2. The input to our pipeline includes calibrated multi-view images
(left), semantic segmentations of hair and foreground (middle), recon-
structed inner and outer meshes with the hair bounding box (right), and
optional hair partline annotation on one image (middle column, first row).
3
METHOD OVERVIEW
3.1
Our Pipeline
Our method contains three stages. In the first stage (Sec. 4), we
establish an implicit hair volume that encodes both the spatial
occupancy and orientation of the target hairs from multi-view image
captures (Sec. 3.2). In the second stage (Sec. 5), we grow initial hair
strands within the hair volume based on simple heuristics. In the
last stage (Sec. 6), starting from these initial strands, we optimize
the final hair geometry with respect to multi-view images utilizing
differentiable rendering, where strands are represented as chained
hair Gaussians.
The final output of this pipeline is a collection of approximately
150𝐾hair strands, each explicitly represented as a polyline with
𝑁𝑘= 100 points. While appearance parameters are also estimated
as side-outputs, they are not the focus of this work. Being prior-free,
our method is designed to capture subject-specific details such as
flying strands beyond the coverage of existing datasets. Meanwhile,
our method also strives to maintain the physical correctness of the
hair geometry, including smoothness and scalp-connectivity. The
estimated geometry is ready to be used in downstream pipelines
such as physically based rendering, animation, and editing tasks.
3.2
Data Acquisition and Preparation
We collect input data using our multi-camera system with 64 cam-
eras at 4𝐾resolution under uniform illumination. All cameras are
calibrated, synchronized, and arranged on a sphere centered around
the subject. Depending on specific hairstyles, there are typically
around 50 cameras that capture the hairs, where the diagonal size of
hair bounding box ranges from 1.3𝐾to 4.6𝐾pixels. For each view,
we compute a semantic segmentation mask that categorizes each
pixel as either background, hair, or body (i.e. non-hair foreground).
To ensure robust segmentation, we employ multiple off-the-shelf
models and derive the final pseudo ground-truth labels using a
simple aggregation strategy, elaborated in Appendix B.
Using all views, we apply the technique in [Guo et al. 2019] to
achieve a rough surface reconstruction of the subject. We then dilate
the mesh by 2cm to ensure all hairs are encompassed. This mesh,
ACM Trans. Graph., Vol. 43, No. 6, Article 254. Publication date: December 2024.


254:4
•
Yuxiao Zhou, Menglei Chai, Daoye Wang, Sebastian Winberg, Erroll Wood, Kripasindhu Sarkar, Markus Gross, and Thabo Beeler
Fig. 3. The implicit hair volume network comprises three sub-modules:
the feature network and appearance network are used to estimate view-
independent volume density 𝜎and view-dependent radiance a from input
position x and view direction z, similar to NeRF; an additional structure
network is devised to estimate hair 𝜌ℎand body occupancy 𝜌𝑏as well as
3D orientation (𝜃,𝜙) in polar angles.
referred to as the outer mesh, sets a hard outer boundary for the
subject and hairs. We also fit a parameteric head mesh model to the
captured subject using dense facial landmarks. The resulting mesh
of the fitted head model, referred to as the inner mesh, approximates
the bald surface of the subject’s head and serves as the basis for
locating the hair scalp where all strands originate. Finally, we derive
a loose 3D bounding box of the hairs by projecting per-view hair
segmentation onto the outer mesh,. The outer mesh, inner mesh,
and bounding box together define the hair volume on which the
whole pipeline operates. If the hairstyle involves a visible parting
line, we optionally accept a 2D annotation of the line from a selected
top-down view. This straightforward step is the only manual one
in the pipeline and takes less than a minute to complete. Fig. 2
illustrates the inputs required for our method.
After all inputs are prepared, our pipeline works fully automatic
without any further human intervention. We consistently apply
the same pipeline with identical parameters for all results in this
paper, from both our in-house captures and public datasets that
cover diverse hairstyles.
4
NEURAL HAIR VOLUME
In the first stage, we build neural implicit fields to reconstruct the
spatial orientation and occupancy of the subject’s hairs, drawing
parallels to neural radiance fields (NeRFs). Our key contribution
in this stage is to formulate a neural orientation field within the
framework of volume rendering.
4.1
Network Structure
The implicit hair volume is formulated as an MLP network V. The
input to V is a 3D position x ∈R3, and the output includes volume
density 𝜎∈[0, 1], hair occupancy 𝜌ℎ∈[0, 1], body occupancy
𝜌𝑏∈[0, 1] (refers collectively to the non-hair volume), and 3D hair
orientation in polar angles (𝜃∈(0, 𝜋],𝜙∈(0, 𝜋]), all of which
are view-independent. Note that the polar angles are defined on
a hemisphere because they are undirectional, i.e. "lines" instead
of "rays". During training, we additionally feed V with the view
direction vector z ∈R3 and receive the view-dependent radiance
color a ∈R3, similar to the vanilla NeRF.
As illustrated in Fig. 3, our model architecture comprises three
sub-networks. It begins with a shared feature network that employs
Fig. 4. Visualization of 3D orientation rendering and projection. We
take two exemplary samples 𝑡1 and 𝑡2, characterized by 3D orientations of
(0.1𝜋, 0.2𝜋) and (0.7𝜋, 0.9𝜋) in polar angles. Both samples reside on the
same ray with transmittances of 0.6 and 1.0, where 𝑡1 is closer to the camera.
In the top row, from left to right, we show the expanded 3D orientation
distributions of 𝑡1, 𝑡2, and their blended integration. In the bottom row, we
illustrate the 2D orientation distribution after projecting their integrated
3D orientations using an exemplary camera matrix, detailed in Eq. 7.
positional encoding to map an input 3D position x into a high-
dimensional vector. Subsequently, an appearance network estimates
view-independent volume density 𝜎and view-dependent color a
from the encoded position vector and additional view-direction
input z. In parallel, the feature network branches into a structure
network that estimates 3D hair orientation (𝜃,𝜙) and the occupancy
values (𝜌ℎ, 𝜌𝑏) of hair and head. In the following, we focus on the
structure network that is specifically devised for our task, while the
feature- and appearance-networks are identical to the original NeRF.
4.2
Neural Orientation Field
Volume rendering of 3D Orientations. The volumetric orientation
plays a crucial role in defining the 3D hair structure. Existing meth-
ods either optimize an explicit direction field with limited resolution
[Wu et al. 2024], or employ neural networks to predict the volumetric
orientation in its entirety, which often leads to oversmoothed results
[Saito et al. 2018]. In contrast, our novel approach optimizes a neural
orientation field that estimates 3D orientations without explicit
limitation in resolution. To construct this neural orientation field,
we introduce a new formulation that “renders” 3D orientations
within the volume rendering paradigm.
Volume rendering of 3D orientations is not as trivial as radiance.
Directly applying 𝛼-blending to the polar angles is conceptually
wrong. For example, if a ray passes through two different hair
strands whose orientations are (𝜋, 0) and (0, 𝜋), assuming the trans-
parency of the front hair is 0.5, then the accumulated orientation
becomes (𝜋/2, 𝜋/2), which is different from either hair and essen-
tially smooths the distinct hairs into the same orientation. The
fundamental reason is that different orientations cannot be naively
added together. To accumulate the orientations of different hairs
along a ray, we need to keep track of all angles.
ACM Trans. Graph., Vol. 43, No. 6, Article 254. Publication date: December 2024.


GroomCap: High-Fidelity Prior-Free Hair Capture
•
254:5
To this end, we propose to expand a single 3D orientation, repre-
sented as polar angles, into a distribution, and perform 𝛼-blending
on the distributions. Formally, for a 3D position x, whose polar
angles are (𝜃x,𝜙x), we construct its distribution of 3D orientations
Hx by using a predefined kernel function as its probability density
function (PDF) ℎx:
ℎx(𝜃,𝜙) = 1
𝐶x
ℎ′
x(𝜃,𝜙)
(1)
ℎ′
x(𝜃,𝜙) =
1
𝛽(||𝜃−𝜃x||2 + ||𝜙−𝜙x||2) + 𝛿
(2)
𝐶x =
∬𝜋
0
ℎ′
x(𝜃,𝜙) d𝜃d𝜙.
(3)
Intuitively, ℎ(·) is inversely proportional to the squared distance
from an arbitrary angle (𝜃,𝜙) to the “center” orientation (𝜃x,𝜙x),
with a scaling factor 𝛽, a damping factor 𝛿, and a divisor 𝐶x that nor-
malizes the integral to be 1. We empirically found that this inverse-
proportional function performs better than Gaussian kernels. In
practice, we furthermore consider the periodic and undirectional
characteristics of orientations, replacing ℎ′ with the more precise
form ℎ′′:
ℎ′′
x (𝜃,𝜙) =
1
∑︁
𝑖=−1
1
∑︁
𝑗=−1
1
𝛽(||𝜃−𝜃0 + 𝑖𝜋||2 + ||𝜙−𝜙0 + 𝑗𝜋||2) + 𝛿. (4)
The expanded distributions are illustrated in the top row of Fig. 4.
Based on the distribution formulation Hx, we can compute the
accumulated 3D distribution G𝑟along an arbitrary ray 𝑟with the
following PDF:
𝑔𝑟(𝜃,𝜙) =
∫𝑡𝑓
𝑡𝑛
𝑇(𝑡)𝜎 𝑟(𝑡)ℎ𝑟(𝑡) (𝜃,𝜙) d𝑡
(5)
𝑇(𝑡) = exp

−
∫𝑡
𝑡𝑛
𝜎(𝑟(𝛼)) d𝛼

.
(6)
These equations are derived from the classical volume rendering for-
mulation, where 𝑡is the depth value along the ray 𝑟(𝑡) = o +𝑡q that
originates from o with direction q, 𝑇(𝑡) denotes the accumulated
transparency along the ray, and 𝑡𝑛,𝑡𝑓are near and far planes.
In the actual implementation, we quantize the continuous inte-
grals into discrete bins. The range (0, 𝜋] is divided into 64 bins
such that the orientation distributions can be approximated by
vectors of 64 × 64 dimensions, and the accumulation is performed
for each dimension individually. Accordingly, we set the scaling
factor 𝛽= (64/𝜋)2 and 𝛿= 0.01.
Supervision with 2D Orientations. Now we explain how to super-
vise accumulated 3D orientation distributions G using multi-view
images. In previous works, convolution with a bank of oriented
filters was extensively used to estimate 2D orientation fields on hair
images [Paris et al. 2004; Wu et al. 2024], where the 2D orientation of
each pixel is simply assigned as the angle of the filter that activates
the maximum response. However, we argue that representing a
pixel’s 2D orientation with a single value is insufficient. First, a
filter’s receptive field may cover multiple hair strands with different
orientations. Second, several distinct hair strands may overlay and
pass through the same pixel. In both cases, only retaining a single
angle will discard the valuable structural information of all other
Fig. 5. Visualization of orientation distributions. We start with an
input image on the left, where we apply orientation filters and visualize the
maximum responses in the middle. On the right, we select two exemplary
patches (outlined by green and red rectangles on the left-hand side of the
respective row), where the inner rectangles’ sizes equal to the kernel radius.
On the right-hand side, we illustrate the orientational distribution for each
patch. For the green patch in the top row, there is a single sharp peak,
indicating that most strands share the same direction. In contrast, the red
patch in the bottom row shows a strong peak near 135◦and a secondary,
broader peak from 30◦to 70◦. The higher peak represents the thicker hairs
that fill the lower-left half of the patch, while the other peak corresponds to
the strands entering from the top-right corner. Merely keeping the maximum
responses (middle) will omit these critical structural details.
hairs, especially for challenging areas with high local inconsistency.
For example, Fig. 5 inspects the responses of all filters at two patches.
When strand orientations within a patch are locally varied (as high-
lighted by the red rectangle in the second row), using the maximum
response smooths distinct strands into the same orientation and
leads to flat reconstructions.
To better preserve the structural information, we propose to
maintain the responses of all filters, which naturally form a distri-
bution of 2D orientations. We use this 2D orientation distribution
to supervise the neural orientation field, as it effectively aligns
with our formulation that renders 3D orientations as a distribution.
Specifically, for each view with a known camera pose, we project
the 3D orientation distribution G of each ray into a distribution of
2D orientations F with the following PDF:
𝑓(𝜂) = 1
𝐶𝜂
max
(𝜃,𝜙)∈𝑢ℎ(𝜃,𝜙)
(7)
where 𝜂∈(0, 𝜋] is the 2D orientation, 𝑢is a plane spanned by all
(𝜃,𝜙) pairs whose projection on the image plane is angle 𝜂, and 𝐶𝜂
normalizes the integeral to be 1. Then, we define the loss function
for the neural orientation field as
Lori =
∫𝜋
0
||𝑓(𝜂) −¯𝑓(𝜂)||2 d𝜂
(8)
where ¯𝑓(𝜂) is the normalized response of the orientation filter at
angle 𝜂.
In our quantized implementation, 𝜂is discretized into 64 values.
We use 64 Gabor filters to convolve over the grayscale image and
store the responses of all filters. The correspondence between 2D
orientation 𝜂, plane 𝑢, and 3D orientation (𝜃,𝜙) can be easily enu-
merated. An illustration of a projected 2D orientation distribution
can be found in the bottom row of Fig. 4.
ACM Trans. Graph., Vol. 43, No. 6, Article 254. Publication date: December 2024.


254:6
•
Yuxiao Zhou, Menglei Chai, Daoye Wang, Sebastian Winberg, Erroll Wood, Kripasindhu Sarkar, Markus Gross, and Thabo Beeler
4.3
Neural Occupancy Field
Our implicit hair volume further establishes neural occupancy fields
by predicting hair occupancy value 𝜌ℎand body occupancy value
𝜌𝑏at any given position. The continuous values of hair occupancy
naturally align with the fact that hairs are semi-transparent in im-
ages. The occupancy values 𝜌∗are accumulated using the standard
volume rendering formula to give per-pixel labels𝜓∗and supervised
by pseudo ground truth (GT) segmentation labels ¯𝜓∗:
Locc = ||𝜓ℎ−¯𝜓ℎ||2 + ||𝜓𝑏−¯𝜓𝑏||2.
(9)
Notably, the GT masks do not need to be perfect. We find the
segmentations estimated by our method finally outperform GT,
since they implicitly integrate multi-view information.
4.4
Training Strategy
The model undergoes a two-phase training process. Initially, only
the feature and appearance networks are trained with the conven-
tional L2 photometric loss. In the subsequent phase, the structure
network is trained alone with loss 100Lori + 0.02Locc, and the
other two modules are frozen. This two-phase training strategy
enhances stability and convergence. In our experiments, we find
that only supervising radiance in the first phase mitigates the risk
of 𝜎predictions being contaminated by the relatively noisy 2D
semantic and orientation labels. Following [Sarkar et al. 2023], we
utilize the reconstructed outer mesh to decide the depth sampling
range of the rays. This ensures that the model focuses exclusively
on the hair volume.
5
VOLUMETRIC HAIR TRACING
Once the hair volume is established, we extract hair strands by
tracing within the volume using the inferred volumetric orientation
and occupancy with forward Newton method [Chai et al. 2013;
Kuang et al. 2022; Paris et al. 2008]. Specifically, at timestep 𝑘,
each strand is extended by a fixed length 𝑙= 3mm to a new point
v𝑘= v𝑘−1 + 𝑙· norm(m𝑘), where the growing direction m𝑘before
normalization is calculated as:
m𝑘=𝛾· m𝑘−1+
(1 −𝛾) ·   sign(g · m𝑘−1) · g −𝜆min(n · m𝑘−1, 0) · n. (10)
In this formula, g represents the predicted 3D orientation derived
from polar angles. We disambiguate it to the direction most closely
aligned with the previous strand direction m𝑘−1, determined by the
sign function sign(·) applied to the dot product. Additionally, an
inertia term controlled by the factor 𝛾encourages smooth growth
transitions to avoid abrupt changes caused by potential outliers. A
surface repulsion term controlled by factor 𝜆is used to push strands
away from the head according to the surface normal n of the inner
mesh. In our implementation, we set 𝛾= 0.6 and 𝜆= 𝑓/𝑓𝑑, where
𝑓is the current penetration distance between v𝑘−1 and the inner
mesh (0 if not penetrating), and 𝑓𝑑= 5mm is a constant penetration
threshold.
We initialize tracing from seed points uniformly sampled within
the bounding box volume between the inner and the outer mesh.
These seeds are organized into a priority queue, weighted by the
product of volume density and hair occupancy, 𝜎· 𝜌ℎ. We also
dynamically deprioritize seeds in close proximity to newly traced
strands to promote volumetric uniformity.
During tracing, we monitor a health value for each strand and
cease tracing when this value drops to 0. At each step, the health
is reduced if: 1) the current vertex has low volume density 𝜎or
hair occupancy 𝜌ℎ; 2) the vertex goes outside the outer mesh or the
bounding box. Strands traced from seeds in this step are referred to
as volume hairs, which are not guaranteed to connect to the scalp.
The primary challenge with volume hairs not being scalp-rooted
is unreliable structural information near the scalp due to severe
occlusion. To address this, we trace an additional set of scalp hairs
to serve as a bridge between the floating volume hairs and the scalp
surface. Scalp hairs are initiated by sampling seeds on the scalp
region of the inner mesh, with their initial growth directions set to
the normals of the scalp. These hairs are then grown similarly to
volume hairs.
Once all scalp hairs are obtained, for each volume hair, we ran-
domly select a nearby scalp hair and grow the volume hair backward
along this scalp hair to the scalp. This process is able to connect most
strands (typically more than 99%) to the scalp. Any volume hairs that
fail to connect to the scalp are eventually discarded. Additionally,
if a parting line is annotated for the hairstyle, we remove all hairs
crossing it as a refinement step.
The final output of this stage is a collection of 𝑁𝑠strands S =
{s1, s2, ..., s𝑁𝑠}. We resample each strand to 𝑁𝑘= 100 vertices,
i.e. s𝑖∈R𝑁𝑘×3. Although our tracing algorithm can theoretically
generate an arbitrary number of hairs, we target 25𝐾scalp hairs
and 125𝐾volume hairs in all cases.
6
GAUSSIAN-BASED STRAND OPTIMIZATION
After navigating through the aforementioned pipeline from 2D
orientation estimation to implicit hair volume prediction and ulti-
mately to strand tracing, we observe a gradual loss of structural
information. In this final stage, we seek direct supervision from the
original images to recuperate the lost fine details, ensuring a proper
match to the captured imagery.
To achieve this, we adopt the image-based differentiable rendering
framework of 3D Gaussian spatting (3DGS) [Kerbl et al. 2023] to
optimize the reconstructed hairs using photometric losses. Our
method introduces a novel chained hair Gaussian formulation that
constrains the relationships among Gaussians along each strand,
aligning with the inherent geometric nature of hair. While the
concurrent work of GaussianHair [Luo et al. 2024] also proposes
to use cylinderal Gaussians as hair proxies, our formulation avoids
hallucination effects with rigorously designed constraints.
6.1
Formulation of Chained Hair Gaussians
In contrast to the vanilla 3DGS framework, our optimization targets
are the parameters of hair geometry, rather than the shape and
appearance parameters of individual Gaussians. We now describe
the conversion from strand geometry to chained Gaussians in our
representation, which correlates with strand parameters while re-
maining compatible with the Gaussian splatting framework.
We define the elementary unit of strands as line segments. For a
strand of 𝑁𝑘vertices, we denote the segment between vertex v𝑖and
ACM Trans. Graph., Vol. 43, No. 6, Article 254. Publication date: December 2024.


GroomCap: High-Fidelity Prior-Free Hair Capture
•
254:7
v𝑖+1 by p𝑖, characterized by the following parameters: head vertex
v𝑖, tail vertex v𝑖+1, diameter 𝑑, opacity 𝑜, and spherical harmonics
(SH) coefficients r.
In our chained Gaussian representation, each segment p𝑖is ap-
proximated by a Gaussian centered at the midpoint (v𝑖+ v𝑖+1)/2.
The covariance matrix 𝐶of this Gaussian is expressed as:
𝐶= 𝐸𝐷𝐷𝑇𝐸𝑇.
(11)
Here, 𝐸= [e𝑖, e′
𝑖, e′′
𝑖]𝑇represents the principle axes of the Gaussian,
where e𝑖is the unit direction vector of the segment v𝑖+1 −v𝑖, and
e′
𝑖and e′′
𝑖are two orthogonal unit vectors to e𝑖. The matrix 𝐷=
diag[𝜏𝑙,𝜏𝑑,𝜏𝑑] contains scales of the axes, with 𝜏𝑙= ||𝑣𝑖+1 −𝑣𝑖||/2
and 𝜏𝑑= 𝑑/2 being the axial and radial scales, respectively.
Following this conversion, each strand is transformed into a chain
of thin Gaussians, suitable for rendering via Gaussian splatting. At
the conclusion of optimization, we typically manage 50𝐾strands,
equivalent to 5𝑀Gaussians, and render only one-third of them
picked randomly due to limited memory capacity.
In addition to hair Gaussians, we also incorporate auxiliary Gaus-
sians to model the non-hair foreground, serving as proxies for occlu-
sion. These Gaussians, referred to as body Gaussians, are anchored at
the vertices of the inner mesh and modeled as discs with optimizable
radii 𝑤. The orientation of each body Gaussian disc is fixed, aligned
with the normal of the corresponding vertex. The thickness is set
to 0.001mm. The covariance matrix of each disc is calculated as
described in Eq. 11, treating each Gaussian as a short, thick disc
covering the surface. Given our focus on hair, we differentiate non-
hair pixels in each image by painting them a distinct color from hair,
such as green. Accordingly, the body Gaussians are initialized to
the same green color.
6.2
Geometry Parameters
Instead of directly optimizing the positions of strand vertices, we
optimize a low-dimensional latent vector for each strand. This
improves training efficiency while also serving as an effective regu-
larizer, preventing exaggerated strand geometry such as unnatural
sharp turns, which occurs with per-vertex optimizations.
To build such a strand latent space, previous efforts typically
leverage generic prior models based on synthetic curves. However,
we argue that building such a comprehensive space is impractical
due to the high variability of real-world hairs and the significant
domain gap. Instead, we construct this strand latent space in a
self-supervised manner, relying solely on the initial strands of the
specific subject. This approach aligns with the intuition that the
hairs of the same individual should share statistical similarities.
Specifically, for each subject, we train a strand variational au-
toencoder (strand-VAE) that encodes a latent code l ∈R128 from
root-relative vertex positions s′ ∈R(𝑁𝑘−1)×3. While the strand-
VAE is a vanilla MLP network, it works better than more complex
generic models, such as [Rosu et al. 2022b; Zhou et al. 2023], since
training a subject-specific latent prior is a much easier task. A less
complex model structure also simplfies optimization. The strand-
VAE is initialized from scratch and trained only with the traced hair
strands. In our experimental set-up we show that the quality and
diversity of the data is sufficiently good to serve as a dataset.
6.3
Appearance Parameters
While the high degree of freedom (DoF) associated with Gauss-
ian parameters enables effective reproduction of appearance, it
also introduces severe hallucination effects when precise geometry
is desired, particularly when it comes to the intricate structure
of hairs. As long as the volume is reasonably filled, even if the
strand geometry is inaccurate, the high DoF of color parameters
can fabricate the appearance to simulate shading that minimizes
photometric errors, without the support from proper geometry.
This necessitates additional constraints in hair parameterization
to ensure that improvements in appearance actually result from
enhancements in geometry.
To limit the per-strand appearance DoF, we propose the following
simplifications to the hair appearance parameters:
• View variations of color: We eliminate view-dependent com-
ponents of color by reducing the SH degree to zero, which
is non-essential for our method that prioritizes geometry op-
timization. This adjustment prevents the potential misuse of
view-dependent effects.
• Spatial variations of color: Instead of maintaining a color pa-
rameter for each strand segment, we optimize the color for
only 8 segments (referred to as anchors) uniformly distributed
along the strand. The color for other segments is derived via
piecewise linear interpolation.
• Segment diameters: Similar to color, we also parameterize seg-
ment diameters using these 8 anchors.
• Opacity: We restrict each strand to 2 opacity values: 𝑜1 for the
first 𝑁𝑘−𝑁𝑡−1 segments starting from the root, and 𝑜2 for
the final 𝑁𝑡= 8 segments, recognizing that the tails of strands
tend to be more transparent.
In conclusion, for each strand, we optimize the following pa-
rameters: strand latent vector l ∈R128, anchor diameters d ∈R8,
anchor colors r ∈R8×3, and opacity (𝑜1,𝑜2) ∈R2. By comparison,
the vanilla 3DGS setting would involve nearly 1400 optimizable
parameters per strand, which is approximately 8 times more than
the 162 parameters of our streamlined formulation.
6.4
Adaptive Control of Hair Gaussians
During optimization, we adaptively control the strand distribution
by periodically employing heuristic-based actions including splitting
and pruning. The Gaussian optimization starts with 30𝐾initial
strands uniformly sampled from the traced hairs, and gradually
propogates them to 50𝐾in the end. This adaptive control leads to a
more natual hair arrangement.
Splitting. With the introduction of diameter parameters, individ-
ual strands are allowed to grow thicker and split into multiple new
strands where necessary. For each strand 𝑠𝑖with 𝑁𝑘−1 segments,
given its per-segment diameters 𝑑𝑖,𝑗and opacities 𝑜𝑖,𝑗for the 𝑗-th
vertex, we compute the per-strand split score 𝜔𝑖the following way:
𝜔𝑖=
ˆ𝜔𝑖
1
𝑁𝑠
Í𝑁𝑠
𝑖=1 ˆ𝜔𝑖
,
ˆ𝜔𝑖=
𝑁𝑘−1
∑︁
𝑗=1
𝑑𝑖,𝑗· 𝑜𝑖,𝑗.
(12)
ACM Trans. Graph., Vol. 43, No. 6, Article 254. Publication date: December 2024.


254:8
•
Yuxiao Zhou, Menglei Chai, Daoye Wang, Sebastian Winberg, Erroll Wood, Kripasindhu Sarkar, Markus Gross, and Thabo Beeler
where 𝑁𝑠is the number of strands at the time of splitting. Each
strand is then split into ⌈𝜔𝑖⌉new strands, whose vertices are gen-
erated by randomly displacing the original positions within its
diameter.
This splitting operation serves two purposes in improving opti-
mization quality. First, it dynamically adjusts hair density to achieve
a more uniform distribution that aligns with the image data. Second,
it creates flyaway strands to capture details that are missing in the
initial hair tracing.
Pruning. Besides splitting, we regularly perform clean-up opera-
tions, including pruning and cutting, to preserve only meaningful
strands and segments. Throughout the optimization, certain strands
may migrate outside the designated hair volume, thus becoming
transparent or blending into the color of the background. These
strands, practically invisible and uninteresting, should be removed
completely. Additionally, some strands can grow excessively long
into void spaces, necessitating the cutting of their tails instead of
the entire strands.
In our method, we identify and prune those invisible strands based
on their opacity and color. We periodically remove strands whose
average vertex opacity falls below a threshold of 0.1. Furthermore,
we calculate the average hair color ¯rh of all strands in CIELAB
color space, pruning each strand s𝑖if its average color r𝑖is closer to
the background color rb than to the average hair color ¯rh. Similar
checks are conducted for strand vertices individually. We remove
consecutive invisible vertices from strand tails until the first visible
vertex, according to the aforementioned criteria. While the invisible
vertices in the middle of strands are not affected, in practice they
are very few and do not harm the reconstruction quality.
6.5
Training Objectives
The primary loss during optimization is the L2 photometric distance
between rendered images and reference images, denoted as Li. In
addition to this, we introduce the following regularization terms.
For the sake of simplicity, we omit per-strand subscripts. The final
loss terms are computed as the mean over all strands.
Volume Guidance Term. We reuse the implicit hair volume model
from the first stage to provide additional 3D guidance:
Ln =
1
𝑁𝑘−1
𝑁𝑘−1
∑︁
𝑖=1
min(||e𝑖−g𝑖||, ||e𝑖+ g𝑖||),
(13)
where e𝑖is the direction of the hair segment, and g𝑖is the undirec-
tional 3D orientation prediction at (v𝑖+1 + v𝑖)/2. This term helps to
regularize strands that do not receive adequate gradient information
from image pixels.
Penetration Prevention Term. We introduce a penetration loss to
prevent hairs from growing inside the inner mesh:
Lp = 1
𝑁𝑘
𝑁𝑘
∑︁
𝑖=1
||v𝑖−˜v𝑖||2,
(14)
where ˜v𝑖is the nearest point on the inner mesh surface to v𝑖. This
term is applied only if v𝑖is already located inside the mesh.
Heursitic Terms. Finally, we incorporate the following heuristic-
based terms:
• Diameter term: L𝑑= Í𝑁𝑘−1
𝑖=1
|𝑑𝑖|/(𝑁𝑘−1) to encourage strands
to be thin and sharp;
• Latent regularization term: Ll = |l−ˆl| to regularize the strand’s
latent vector l towards its initial value ˆl, obtained from the hair
tracing stage;
• Body radius term: L𝑏= Í𝑁𝑏
𝑖=1 ||𝑤𝑖−ˆ𝑤𝑖||2/𝑁𝑏, a regularization
on the radii 𝑤of body Gaussians, where ˆ𝑤𝑖is the initial radius.
The overall training objective is thus:
L = 𝜆iLi + 𝜆nLn + 𝜆pLp + 𝜆dLd + 𝜆lLl + 𝜆bLb,
(15)
where we set the weights as 𝜆i = 1, 𝜆n = 1.0, 𝜆p = 0.05, 𝜆l = 1.0,
and 𝜆b = 1000. The weight for diameter regularization, 𝜆d, starts at
1 and is doubled after each strand splitting step.
7
EXPERIMENTS
In this section, we first describe implementation details and external
datasets used for experiments. Then, we compare with previous
works and validate the key design choices with in-depth ablation
studies. Finally, we discuss limitations and illustrate failure cases.
To thoroughly test the versatility and robustness of our method,
we take 27 subjects from our in-house capture dataset, covering a
broad spectrum of different hairstyles. All subjects are processed
automatically using the same pipeline. For all results presented in
this paper, unless specified otherwise, we eliminate all hallucination
effects by rendering the reconstructed geometry with predefined
hair materials. This ensures that all shading effects, such as high-
lights, shadows, and transparency, faithfully reflect the quality of the
geometry. We present all visualizations in high-resolution figures.
Readers are encouraged to zoom in on these figures for better details.
More illustrations and applications are available in the Appendix
and supplementary video.
7.1
Implementation
For our implicit hair volume model, the feature network comprises
6 fully-connected (FC) layers, the appearance network consists of 2
FC layers, and the hair structure network includes 8 FC layers, each
having 1024 hidden units. We train both the feature and appearance
networks for 1𝑀steps, followed by an additional 1𝑀steps for the
hair structure network alone. On average, the training process takes
28 hours in total, using 16 Google TPU v5.
For example, we currently render a full orientation distribution
in the neural hair volume, leading to significantly increased compu-
tational overhead due to the large number of bins in the histogram.
The volumetric hair tracing is completed in 1.5 hours using a
single NVIDIA A100 GPU. The bottleneck lies in repeated queries
to the implicit hair volume, which can be potentially boosted by
precomputing an explicit volume at high resolution.
Our Gaussian-based optimization encompasses 15𝐾steps, taking
1.5 hours on 8 NVIDIA H100 GPUs. During the optimization, we
execute hair splitting and pruning every 5𝐾steps, increasing the
number of strands from 30𝐾to 50𝐾. We further apply a final splitting
step that increase the hairs to 150𝐾by scaling the split score 𝜔in
Eq. 12 by 3. The strand-VAE network comprises 6 encoder and 4
ACM Trans. Graph., Vol. 43, No. 6, Article 254. Publication date: December 2024.


GroomCap: High-Fidelity Prior-Free Hair Capture
•
254:9
Fig. 6. Reconstruction results on diverse hairstyles from short hairs to long ponytails, where personal features such as fringe, hairline, and clusters are
faithfully captured. We use the same predefined material to better show geometric details.
decoder layers, taking 2.5 hours to train over 1𝑀steps on a single
NVIDIA A100 GPU.
Prioritizing reconstruction fidelity for production use cases, the
entire pipeline of our method requires more computation than
NeuralHaircut [Sklyarova et al. 2023] (around 3 days on a NVIDIA
RTX 4090 GPU) and MonoHair [Wu et al. 2024] (4 −6 hours on a
NVIDIA RTX 3090 GPU). This is partially because that we consider a
full orientation distribution represented by a large number of bins in
the histogram. Therefore, our reconstruction preserve more details
at the cost of longer processing time.
7.2
Results
In Fig. 6, we demonstrate our results on various hairstyles captured
in our studio. Being prior-free, our method can reconstruct diverse
hairstyles that surpass the coverage of any existing dataset, cap-
turing personal details such as hairlines, fringes, and clusters. Our
approach not only handles common medium-length hair, but also
deals with short hairs and long ponytails using the same pipeline,
which are rarely addressed in previous works – short hairs pose
challenges due to their messiness and inconsistent patterns, while
long ponytails often exceed the capacity of explicit volumes utilized
ACM Trans. Graph., Vol. 43, No. 6, Article 254. Publication date: December 2024.


254:10
•
Yuxiao Zhou, Menglei Chai, Daoye Wang, Sebastian Winberg, Erroll Wood, Kripasindhu Sarkar, Markus Gross, and Thabo Beeler
Fig. 7. Comparions with existing hair reconstruction methods. We
compare GroomCap with MonoHair [Wu et al. 2024] and Neural Haircut
[Sklyarova et al. 2023] on the in-the-wild NHC dataset, rendered with the
same renderer. The rendering camera of NeuralHaircut results are manually
adjusted to match the input.
in prior methods. Our method also performs well on dark and dyed
hairs, a notable improvement over previous works that typically
focus on brighter hair colors.
7.3
Comparisons
We extend the evaluation of our method to the public NeuralHaircut
(NHC) dataset [Sklyarova et al. 2023] and compare with previous
works. Unlike our main dataset that is captured in a more controlled
setup, the NHC dataset comprises only videos captured in-the-wild
using a hand-held smartphone. This setup introduces additional
challenges, such as unknown camera poses, non-uniform lighting,
and slight subject movements during capture. To preprocess the
NHC dataset automatically, we employ colmap [Schönberger and
Frahm 2016] for each video to estimate camera poses. After this, we
fit the inner meshes using the same parametric head model. The
outer mesh is approximated simply by a sphere, roughly enclosing
the head and hair. Furthermore, we do not utilize any parting-line
annotations for this dataset.
In Fig. 7 we compare our results with state-of-the-art multi-view
hair reconstruction works MonoHair [Wu et al. 2024] and Neural
Haircut [Sklyarova et al. 2023] on the in-the-wild NHC dataset.
While our reconstructions on this dataset are inferior than our
primary setting due to the imperfect inputs, they remain comparable
with the concurrent work of MonoHair and outperforms the earlier
work of NeuralHaircut. Unlike these works, which are strongly
regularized by prior models, our prior-free reconstructions offer
better flexibility and yield more visually realistic outcomes.
Fig. 8. Ablation studies for implicit hair volume. We show strands
traced from different hair volumes, including full method (second column),
2D supervision of maximum orientations without keeping the distribution
(third column), and directly 𝛼-blending 3D orientation angles without our
rendering algorithm (fourth column). The results are either overly smoothed
(third column) or contain incomplete and sparser strands (fourth column).
Fig. 9. Visualization of 3D orientation predections. On an example
subject, we show a reference view (top-left) and the corresponding hair
reconstruction (top-middle). In the reference view, we highlight a sample
patch (the white square) where two intersecting wisps are accruately
captured in the output. In the lower part of this figure, we plot voxel densities
along the ray path at the center of the patch using a line chart. For each
density peak, we visualize the corresponding predicted 3D orientation by
drawing an arrow over the patch. The first peak represents the front hair
wisp with a 3D orientation in camera space of [−0.59, −0.77, 0.23] and a
2D projection of 52.5◦. Beginning at depth 1.75m (the fourth peak), the
ray intersects the back layer of hair, with 2D projections ranging from
107◦to 130◦. At the top-right, we visualize the accumulated 2D orientation
distribution along the same ray at the patch center, identifying two peaks.
The first peak at 48◦correlates to the front hairs, while the second peak at
143◦corresponds to the hair at the back.
7.4
Ablation Studies
In this section we evaluate the critical design choices of our method.
For the implicit hair volume model, our key contributions are: 1)
ACM Trans. Graph., Vol. 43, No. 6, Article 254. Publication date: December 2024.
