Accurate estimation of mechanical parameters for simulation of woven fabrics is essential in many fields. To facilitate this we first present a new orthotropic hyperelastic constitutive model for woven fabrics. Next, we design an experimental protocol for characterizing real fabrics based on commercially available tests. Finally, we create a method for accurately fitting the material parameters to the experimental data. The last step is accomplished by solving inverse problems based on a Catmull-Clark subdivision finite element discretization of the Kirchhoff-Love equations for thin shells. Using this approach we are able to reproduce the fully nonlinear behavior corresponding to the captured data with a small number of parameters while maintaining all fundamental invariants from ∗Also with Walt Disney Animation Studios. †Also with Walt Disney Animation Studios. Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org. SCA ’17, July 28-30, 2017, Los Angeles, CA, USA © 2017 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to Association for Computing Machinerry. ISBN 978-1-4503-5091-4/17/07...$15.00 https://doi.org/10.1145/3099564.3099577 continuum mechanics. The resulting constitutive model can be used with any discretization (e.g., simple triangle meshes) and not just subdivision finite elements. We illustrate the entire process with results for five types of fabric and compare photo reference of the real fabrics to the simulated equivalents.