While hair is an essential component of virtual humans, it is also one of the most challenging digital assets to create. Existing automatic techniques lack the generality and ﬂexibility to create rich hair variations, while manual authoring interfaces often require considerable artistic skills and eﬀorts, especially for intricate 3D hair structures that can be diﬃcult to navigate. We propose an interactive hair modeling system that can help create complex hairstyles in minutes or hours that would otherwise take much longer with existing tools. Modelers, including novice users, can focus on the overall hairstyles and local hair deformations, as our system intelligently suggests the desired hair parts. Our method combines the ﬂexibility of manual authoring and the convenience of data-driven automation. Since hair contains intricate 3D structures such as buns, knots, and strands, they are inherently challenging to create using traditional 2D interfaces. Our system provides a new 3D hair authoring interface for immersive interaction in virtual reality (VR). Users can draw high-level guide strips, from which our system predicts the most plausible hairstyles via a deep neural network trained from a professionally curated dataset. Each hairstyle in our dataset is composed of multiple variations, serving as blend-shapes to ﬁt the user drawings via global blending and local deformation. The ﬁtted hair models are visualized as interactive suggestions that the user can select, modify, or ignore. We conducted a user study to conﬁrm that our system can signiﬁcantly reduce manual labor while improve the output quality Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior speciﬁc permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org. UIST’19 , October 20–23, 2019, New Orleans, LA, USA c⃝2019 ACM. ISBN 978-1-4503-6816-2/19/10...$15.00 DOI: https://doi.org/10.1145/3332165.3347876 for modeling a variety of head and facial hairstyles that are challenging to create via existing techniques.